Measuring Human Trafficking
Ernesto U. Savona
and Sonia Stefanizzi (Eds.)



Measuring Human
Trafficking
Complexities And Pitfalls
Ernesto U. Savona                                      Sonia Stefanizzi
Professor of Criminology                               Professor of Methodology of Social Research
Catholic University of Milan                           Faculty of Sociology
Director of Transcrime                                 University of Milan-Bicocca
(Joint Research Centre on Transnational Crime)         Officer-in-charge of CNPDS/ISPAC
ISPAC Scientific Co-ordinator                          research activities
Italy                                                  Italy
ernesto.savona@unicatt.it                              sonia.stefanizzi@unimib.it




Library of Congress Control Number: 2006940181

ISBN-10: 0-387-68042-X           e-ISBN-10: 0-387-68044-6
ISBN-13: 978-0-387-68042-2       e-ISBN-13: 978-0-387-68044-6

Printed on acid-free paper.

© 2007 Springer Science + Business Media, LLC
All rights reserved. This work may not be translated or copied in whole or in part without the written
permission of the publisher (Springer Science + Business Media, LLC, 233 Spring Street, New York,
NY 10013, USA), except for brief excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis. Use
in connection with any form of information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer
software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed is forbidden.
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, even if
they are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to whether or not
they are subject to proprietary rights.

9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

springer.com
Acknowledgement




The chapters collected in this book are revised versions of selected papers presented at
the ISPAC international Conference on “Measuring Human Trafficking: Complexities and
Pitfalls” held in Courmayeur Mont Blanc, Italy, in December 2005.

ISPAC hereby wishes to thank the Courmayeur Foundation for its generous support.




                                                                                      v
Contents



1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    1
   Ernesto U. Savona and Sonia Stefanizzi

2. Human Trafficking: A Crime Against Humanity . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                         5
   Fausto Pocar


Defining the Phenomenon

3. Trafficking in Human Beings: Uniform Definitions
   for Better Measuring and for Effective Counter-Measures . . . . . . 13
   Kauko Aromaa

4. Collecting Data on Human Trafficking: Availability,
   Reliability and Comparability of Trafficking Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
   Kristiina Kangaspunta

5. Enhancing Data Collection and Research on Trafficking
   in Persons. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
   Frank Laczko


Analysing the Complexities

6. Measuring the Non-Measurable: Towards the Development
   of Indicators for Measuring Human Trafficking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
   Sonia Stefanizzi

7. A Criminal Network Approach to Understanding & Measuring
   Trafficking in Human Beings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
   Jay Albanese


                                                                                                                  vii
viii      Contents

Quantitative and Qualitative approaches

8. Review of Official Statistics on Trafficking
   in Human Beings for Sexual Exploitation and their Validity
   in the 25 EU Member States from Official Statistics
   to Estimates of the Phenomenon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
   Andrea Di Nicola and Andrea Cauduro

9. Qualitative Research in Trafficking – A Particular Case . . . . . . . . 95
   Grigoris Lazos

10. The Long Road from Rhetoric to Evidence on Trafficking
    in Human Beings: About Research Efforts to Prepare Proper
    EU Monitoring on the Matter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
    Gert Vermeulen

11. Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
    Ernesto U. Savona and Sonia Stefanizzi
Contributors



Jay Albanese, Professor, School of Government and Public Affairs
Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA; former Chief,
International Center, National Institute of Justice, Washington, USA.

Kauko Aromaa, Director, European Institute for Crime Prevention and
Control, affiliated with the United Nations (HEUNI), Helsinki, Finland.

Andrea Cauduro, Researcher, Transcrime (Joint Research Centre on
Transnational Crime, University of Trento/Catholic University of Milan),
Italy.

Andrea Di Nicola, Researcher, Faculty of law, University of Trento;
Co-ordinator of Transcrime (Joint Research Centre on Transnational
Crime, University of Trento/Catholic University of Milan), Italy.

Kristiina Kangaspunta, Chief, Anti-Human Trafficking Unit, United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Vienna, Austria.

Frank Laczko, Head of Research and Publications, International
Organization for Migration (IOM), Geneva, Switzerland.

Grigoris Lazos, Associate Professor, Department of Criminology,
Panteion University, Athens, Greece.

Fausto Pocar, Professor of International Law, University of Milan;
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia, The Hague, The Netherlands.

Ernesto U. Savona, Professor, Catholic University, Milan; Director,
Transcrime (Joint Research Centre on Transnational Crime, University
of Trento/Catholic University of Milan); ISPAC Scientific Co-ordinator,
Italy.

                                                                      ix
x   Contributors

Sonia Stefanizzi, Professor of Sociology, University of Milan-
Bicocca; Officer-in-charge of CNPDS/ISPAC research activities, Milan,
Italy.

Gert Vermeulen, Director, Institute for International Research on
Crime Policy (Ircp), University of Ghent, Belgium.
1
Introduction
Ernesto U. Savona and Sonia Stefanizzi




The need to tackle the phenomenon of trafficking in human beings and,
as part of this, the sexual exploitation of foreign women and children,
has been increasingly recognized in recent years by many institutional,
international and national agencies - as the copious documentation on the
subject demonstrates. Yet, beyond all the interventions and provisions
that have been made, the links: prostitution-migration, poor countries-
rich countries, demand for sex from men in rich countries met by
women from poor countries, still exist in all their starkness despite all
counter-measures. These measures include, among others, information
and prevention campaigns, enhanced co-operation between the various
national and international police forces to combat the criminal organiza-
tions and the promulgation and implementation of new legislative provi-
sions. Any analysis of the phenomenon shows with increasing clarity that
even if the terms “clandestine immigration” and “trafficking in human
beings” define in principle two different activities, each of them consis-
tently becomes closely intertwined with the other. They are both, in fact,
segments of a new immense area of criminal activity, generated by the
migrants’ aspirations for a better life for themselves and their families,
on one hand, and the obstacles which the immigration authorities put in
the way of their realization, on the other.
   The wealth of empirical literature produced in recent years – as demon-
strated by the contributions contained in this volume – seems to show
that there is no longer a clear distinction between migrants’ countries
of origin and of destination. Indeed, many countries perform both roles:
a portion of their population will move abroad while masses of illegal
immigrants flock to them. Morocco is just such a case, as is the Dominican
Republic. Other countries act as crossing-points or waiting areas on the
long route ahead: Mexico for Guatemalans on their way to the USA.,
Libya for people from Chad waiting to cross over to Italy. India, Mexico,
Turkey, Egypt, Spain, Portugal and Morocco. To these we should add
the countries receiving significant remittances from abroad (money sent

                                                                        1
2    Ernesto U. Savona and Sonia Stefanizzi

by emigrant workers to their families at home) which are also becoming
increasingly important destinations for migrants (Naim, 2005).
   Another contributory factor to the mass movements of people has been
the collapse of the Soviet bloc and its boundaries: the regained freedom
of movement has immediately made millions of workers available for
the countries needing them (as well as for some who had no such need
at all).
   Consequently, it is obvious that trafficking in human beings consti-
tutes a desperate problem on a global scale. Although it may still be
difficult to estimate the value of the trade in human beings, particularly
due to the lack of homogeneous and accurate data, all experts confirm
that the volume of the traffic has never been so great, nor has it ever
increased at such a dizzying rate. What makes it even more difficult to
establish a genuine strategy to fight the phenomenon on a global scale,
is the fact that available data are scarce, unreliable and not mutually
comparable. Although some progress was made recently, the fact remains
that statistical data on trafficking in human beings is extremely inade-
quate everywhere in the world. The absence of a common definition,
along with the lack of harmonization among legal systems and the refusal
by some States to even recognize that such a trade exists, all stand in
the way of theoretical analysis and empirical research on trafficking in
human beings for sexual exploitation and impede co-operation between
States. The fact that each State seems to have a different perception
of the problem directly influences policy decisions and, inevitably, the
statistically available details of the phenomenon. Consequently, there
emerges a lack, both nationally and internationally, of reliable collection
systems and of consistent reporting of basic data on the various facets
of the phenomenon of trafficking in foreign women and children for
sexual exploitation. This occurs despite the recent efforts by various
national and international governmental agencies and scientific institu-
tions, with a view to provide an overall perspective, based on established
methodologies, of the problems of trafficking at the various territorial
levels. The available information, as the essays in this volume clearly
show, is fragmentary, heterogeneous, difficult to acquire, uncorrelated
and often outdated. Awareness of these deficiencies has increasingly
brought together governmental institutions and scholars, in an effort to
eliminate the inconsistencies and with the more or less explicit aim of
grasping the true quantitative dimensions of the phenomenon.
   There is no doubt that, over the last twenty years, the phenomena
of trafficking in human beings and immigration have been controversial
“objects” of measurement, as regards the number and characteristics of
the individuals at risk and of the victims, in the case of trafficking, and the
                                                          1. Introduction   3

intensity and characteristics of the movements, in the case of immigration.
Both areas of study, as is amply demonstrated in the essays in this volume,
involve a plurality of data at various levels, which frequently, if not
always, prove fragmentary and difficult to compare. As is shown in the
following pages, the low reliability of data in this field of study results
from a number of factors which cannot all be easily or quickly eliminated,
whether from the theoretical or the practical points of view. In particular,
one may identify three basic reasons for the lack of homogeneity in the
various sources:

1. Firstly, the complexity of the subject under examination, its multi-
   dimensional form and the inherent characteristics of the quanti-
   tative investigatory instruments and their capacity to “measure” and
   comprehend the evolution of the phenomenon.
2. Secondly, issues of a more strictly epistemological nature, i.e. the
   relationship between the conceptual instruments available to the
   observer and the social phenomenon under observation. In other words,
   data on trafficking in human beings, and - in view of the close existing
   links - on immigration, are very often, as one contributor argues, the
   result of administrative practices of various national and international
   bodies, who, responding to precise policies on migration, define and
   restrict the accessible statistics on the phenomenon.
3. Finally, the almost total lack of co-ordination (especially with regard to
   the adoption of a common classification system ) between the various
   bodies and institutions, which, for various reasons and at various
   levels, investigate the phenomenon.

Despite the reservations expressed on the measurement of trafficking in
human beings, and although the data used in the various contributions are
the best that are available, we have to remember that we are dealing with
estimates which in most cases regard “underground” activities. As a result,
we can easily either under-estimate or over-estimate the true situation.
Nevertheless, all the current evidence supports the central empirical thesis
of this volume: today the volume of traffic in human beings is greater
than in the past, and the activities that generate it are more complex and
sophisticated. As the following chapters demonstrate, we are only just
now beginning to understand the practical operation of the phenomenon
and the consequences resulting from it.
2
Human Trafficking: A Crime
Against Humanity
Fausto Pocar




Abstract:    This chapter addresses human trafficking in light of international criminal
             law, with a view to considering whether and to what extent it may be
             characterized, when certain conditions are met, as a crime against humanity.
             This conclusion may contribute to enhancing international cooperation in
             this area.



1.    Introduction
The notion of crimes against humanity as developed under international
law since the adoption of the Statute of the International Military Tribunal
of Nuremberg does not need to be discussed here. It suffices to recall that
crimes against humanity were identified as serious violations of funda-
mental human rights, perpetrated either in war or peacetime as part of a
widespread or systematic attack against a civilian population. However,
the definition of crimes against humanity may be limited to violations
committed in war time for jurisdictional reasons. In this connection, the
Statute of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
(“ICTY”)1 limits the jurisdiction of the ICTY in respect of crimes against
humanity “when committed in armed conflict, whether international
or internal in character” (Article 5)2 . The Statute of the International

1
  On 25 May 1993, the Security Council adopted the Statute of the ICTY by Resolution
no. 827 (S/RES/827). This Statute has been amended several times. See the Resolution
at http://www.un.org/icty.
2
  According to Article 5 “The International Tribunal shall have the power to prosecute
persons responsible for the following crimes when committed in armed conflict, whether
international or internal in character, and directed against any civilian population: a)
murder; b) extermination; c) enslavement; d) deportation; e) imprisonment; f) torture; g)
rape; h) persecutions on political, racial and religious grounds; i) other inhumane acts.”


                                                                                        5
6     Fausto Pocar

Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (“ICTR”), meanwhile, requires that the
attack against the civilian population be committed on certain discrim-
inatory grounds as a jurisdictional requirement for the prosecution of
crimes against humanity3 . The most recent Statute, that of the Interna-
tional Criminal Court (“ICC”) adopted in Rome in 1998, does not impose
either of these jurisdictional requirements4 . Thus, the jurisdiction of the
ICC extends to violations committed both in war- and peacetime and does
not require that the violations form part of an attack against a civilian
population which is discriminatory in nature (K. AA. Khan, R. Dixon &
A. Fulford, 2005)5 .
   The definition of crimes against humanity in the Rome Statute is set
out in Article 7, and includes a list of acts which, when committed as
part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian
population, with knowledge of the attack, will constitute a crime against
humanity. The characteristic element of the ICC definition of crimes
against humanity is therefore the existence of a “widespread or systematic
attack” against any civilian population. In further defining this element,
the Statute indicates that it means a course of conduct involving the
multiple commission of serious violations of fundamental human rights,
pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or organizational policy to commit
such attack.
   The last indication is of significant weight, in that it refers not only
to State policies, but also to the policies of organizations. Criminal
organizations, in association with or independent of national policies,
and in particular those of a certain size which are active in international
organized criminality may fall within the scope of Article 7 provided

3
  On 8 November 1994 the Security Council adopted the Statute of the ICTR by
Resolution no. 955 (S/RES/955). Article 3 “Crimes against Humanity” provides that “The
International Tribunal for Rwanda shall have the power to prosecute persons responsible
for the following crimes when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack
against any civilian population on national, political, ethnic, racial or religious grounds:
a) murder; b) extermination; c) enslavement; d) deportation; e) imprisonment; f) torture;
g) rape; h) persecutions on political, racial and religious grounds; i) other inhumane acts.”
(The text can be found at http://www.ictr.org).
4
  The Statute has been adopted on 17 July 1998 by the United Nations Diplomatic
Conference of Plenipotentiaries on the Establishment of an International Criminal Court
(http://www.icc-cpi.int). The Statute entered into force on 1 July 2002, in accordance
to Article 126, when the 60th instrument of ratification was deposited. One hundred
Countries are States Parties to the Rome Statute.
5
  For the definition of the crimes against humanity in the Statute of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone, in the Law on the Establishment of Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts
of Cambodia for the Prosecution of Crimes Committed During the Period of Democratic
Kampuchea, in the Statute of the Iraqi Special Tribunal, in the Regulation No. 2000/15
concerning the Special Panel for East Timor, see K. AA. Khan, R. Dixon & A. Fulford,
Archbold International Criminal Courts, London, 2005, p. 624 ff.
                                 2. Human Trafficking: A Crime Against Humanity              7

that the activity of the organization may be characterized as a widespread
or systematic attack directed against groups of civilians. It is after all
the most vulnerable civilians who become the targets of organised inter-
national criminal activity. It is of course too early to assess how the
jurisprudence of the ICC may deal with this matter, as there is no case
law of the Court so far. However, it has to be pointed out that the inter-
pretation that the Court will give to the notion “organizational policy”
and “widespread or systematic attack” will also impact significantly on
the definition of human trafficking as an international crime6 .


2.    The Rome Statute in Relation to Human Trafficking
      (Art. 7)
The following acts listed in Article 7 of the Rome Statute may
be considered in relation to human trafficking: enslavement, depor-
tation or forcible transfer, sexual slavery and enforced prostitution,
and finally the catch-all clause, “other inhumane acts of a similar
character intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body
or to mental or physical health” (W. Schabas, 2004; A. Cassese, 2002;
D. Robinson, 2001; C.K. Hall, 1999) 7 . Without going into detail, it
appears that situations normally referred to as “human trafficking” –
such as putting a person on the black labour market, trafficking for
purposes of female and child prostitution, exploiting minors in various


6
  According to Article 7, crime against humanity means “any of the following acts when
committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian
population, with knowledge of the attack: (a) Murder; (b) Extermination; (c) Enslavement;
(d) Deportation or forcible transfer of population; (e) Imprisonment or other severe depri-
vation of physical liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international law; (f) Torture;
(g) Rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization,or
any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity; (h) Persecution against any
identifiable group or collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious,
gender as defined in paragraph 3, or other grounds that are universally recognized as
impermissible under international law, in connection with any act referred to in this
paragraph or any crime within the jurisdiction of the Court; (i) Enforced disappearance
of persons; (j) The crime of apartheid; (k) Other inhumane acts of a similar character
intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or physical
health...”.
7
   See W. Schabas, An Introduction to the International Criminal Court, Cambridge,
2004, at p. 41 ff.; A. Cassese, Crimes against Humanity, in Cassese, Gaeta, Jones (eds.),
The Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court: a Commentary,vol. I, Oxford,
2002, 353-378, at 374; D. Robinson, The Elements for Crimes against Humanity, in Lee
(ed.), The International Criminal Court, Ardsley 2001, p. 57 ff., especially p. 84 ff.; C.K.
Hall, Crimes against Humanity, in Triffterer (ed.), Commentary on the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court, Baden-Baden, 1999, p. 160 ff.
8     Fausto Pocar

forms, adopting minors for purposes of removal of organs, and so
forth – can easily be characterized as one or more of these acts. In
this connection, it may be further pointed out that all these kinds of
trafficking have a common denominator, i.e. reducing human beings
to forms of property over which an unlimited of power is exercised
by another human being (Q. Obokata, 2005; J. Fitzpatrick, 2003)8 . This
feature of human trafficking is largely underlined in international practice,
including in the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, adopted in
November 2000 by the United Nations General Assembly (A/Res/55/25)
(K. Abramson, 2003; L. Potts, 2003; M. Vandenberg, 2002)9 . This
Protocol, in defining “trafficking in persons”, puts the accent on the
control one person maintains over another person, for the purpose of
exploitation10 . It also finds strong support in the Statute of the ICC, which

8
   Cfr. Q. Obokata, Trafficking of Human Beings as a Crime against Humanity: Some
Implications for the International Legal System, in International and Comparative Law
Quarterly, 2005, p. 445 ff.; J. Fitzpatrick, Trafficking as a Human Rights Violation:
the Complex Intersection of Legal Frameworks for Conceptualizing and Combating
Trafficking, in Michigan Journal of International Law, 2003, p. 1143 ff.
9
   The Protocol entered into force on 25 December 2003. 101 States are Parties to the
Protocol. Full text of the Protocol can be found at http://www.unodc.org. See, on the
Protocol, K. Abramson, Beyond Consent, Toward Safeguarding Human Rights: Imple-
menting the United Nations Trafficking Protocol, in Harvard International Law Journal,
2003, p. 473 ff.; L. Potts, Global Trafficking in Human Beings: Assessing the Success
of the United Nations Protocol to Prevent Trafficking in Persons, in George Washington
International Law Review, 2003, p. 227 ff.; M. Vandenberg, Complicity, Corruption,
and Human Rights: Trafficking in Human Beings, in Case Western Reserve Journal of
International Law, 2002, p. 323 ff.
   According to Article 3, (a) "Trafficking in persons" shall mean the recruitment, trans-
portation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of persons, by means of the threat or use of force
or other forms of coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power
or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits
to achieve the consent of a person having control over another person, for the purpose
of exploitation. Exploitation shall include, at a minimum, the exploitation of the prosti-
tution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labour or services, slavery
or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the removal of organs; (b) The consent of a
victim of trafficking in persons to the intended exploitation set forth in subparagraph (a)
of this article shall be irrelevant where any of the means set forth in subparagraph (a)
have been used; (c) The recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of a
child for the purpose of exploitation shall be considered "trafficking in persons" even if
this does not involve any of the means set forth in subparagraph (a) of this article; d)
"Child" shall mean any person under eighteen years of age.”
10
    The same elements used in the UN Protocol are included in the Convention on Action
against Trafficking in Human Beings (Article 4), adopted on 16 May 2005 by the Council
of Europe, not yet in force. Full text of the Convention is at http://www.coe.int.
In the Framework Decision, adopted by the European Union (2002/629/JHA, in Official
Journal of the European Communities, L 203, 1 August 2002, p. 1 ff.), on 19 July 2002
                              2. Human Trafficking: A Crime Against Humanity          9

defines enslavement as “the exercise of any or all of the powers attaching
to the right of ownership over a person and includes the exercise of such
powers in the course of trafficking in persons, in particular women and
children” (Article 7(2)(c)).
   Commentators on this provision of the Statute have argued that it would
be wrong to interpret the crime of enslavement in such a way so as to
restrict the jurisdiction of the Court in respect of this crime to traditional
forms of slavery. Furthermore, they have added that, in any event, new
current forms of enslavement would fall within the Court’s jurisdiction
as other inhumane acts intentionally causing great suffering, or serious
injury to bodily or mental health. It may be noted, in this connection, that
the prohibition of slavery is clearly inherent in human rights protection
and is among the rules of customary international law that have to be
regarded as mandatory, i.e. as jus cogens, and cannot be derogated from
by treaty.
   It also has to be recognised that the notion of slavery and enslavement
has evolved in customary international law. This evolution is sufficiently
apparent in the numerous conventions on the abolition of slavery, the
abolition of human trafficking, and several conventions on the abolition
of forced labour elaborated by the International Labour Organization.
In light of these conventions one could easily come to the conclusion
that enslavement is an illegal practice under international law that should
not be construed narrowly. As a Commission of Inquiry of the Inter-
national Labour Organization recently stated with regard to the 1930
Forced Labour Convention11 , the narrow definition of slavery contained
in international instruments adopted at the beginning of last century does
not preclude the application of the prohibition contained therein to all
contemporary features of such a practice.
   In this context, it is interesting to note that a Trial Chamber of the ICTY,
in the judgment rendered on 22 February 2001 in the Kunarac et al. case12
(later confirmed by the Appeals Chamber on 12 June 2002)13 , applied just
such an approach when it accepted, in relation to the trafficking of women


on combating trafficking in human being, the element of the control is highlighted in
the definition of human trafficking (see Article 1, “Offences concerning trafficking in
human beings for the purposes of labour exploitation or sexual exploitation”, as well as
the European Commission Report of 2 May 2006 (COM (2006) 187), based on Article
10 of the Council Framework Decision.)
11
   The Convention adopted on 28 June 1930, was ratified by 169 States (the text is at
http://www.ilo.org).
12
   Prosecutor v. Dragoljub Kunarac, Radomir Kovac and Zoran Vukovic (Case IT-96-
23&23/1), Trial Chamber’s Judgment, 22 February 2001 (paras. 539 – 543).
13
   Prosecutor v. Dragoljub Kunarac, Radomir Kovac and Zoran Vukovic (Case IT-96-
23&23/1), Appeals Chamber Judgment 12 June 2002 (paras. 116-124).
10     Fausto Pocar

in wartime (M. Jarvis, 2003)14 , that enslavement may occur even when
the victims still enjoy de jure a certain freedom of movement, but the
situation in which they find themselves leaves them with no real choice of
escape with the prospect of conducting an independent life (G. Mettraux,
2002; C. Rathgeber, 2002; O. Swaak-Goldman, 2000)15 . Admittedly, the
judgment of the ICTY was rendered in relation to wartime. But, as I
indicated earlier, in the Statute of the ICTY, crimes against humanity are
required to be committed in the context of war for purely jurisdictional
purposes. It should not be viewed as a necessary substantive element
of crimes against humanity. Therefore, the view expressed by the ICTY
on enslavement may well serve as a precedent should a similar case be
brought in a peacetime context.
   In light of these considerations, if enslavement or slavery, is the charac-
teristic feature of human trafficking – as was stressed, it is interesting to
note by the Italian delegation at the Rome Conference – one can only
conclude that, at least in its most serious expressions, human trafficking
should be qualified as a crime against humanity, both under general
international law and the Statute of the ICC.


3.    Conclusions
One final comment has to be made. The universal nature of crimes
against humanity as crimes under international law imposes an obligation
on all States to enact appropriate legislation in order to prevent and
repress their commission, and to prosecute persons allegedly responsible
for their commission. This obligation also implies a duty to identify the
manifold features of contemporary human trafficking in order to define
and harmonize offences as between national jurisdictions, with a view to
enhancing international cooperation both for preventing and repressing
a phenomenon which can only be addressed through the coordinated
effort of all States. Harmonization and definition should be addressed,
in particular, when a State enacts legislation incorporating the Statute of

14
   M. Jarvis, An Emerging Gender Perspective on International Crimes, in Boas &
Schabas (eds.), International Criminal Law Developments in the Case Law of the ICTY,
Leiden, Boston, 2003, p. 157 ff.
15
   See G. Mettraux, International Crimes and the ad hoc Tribunals, Oxford, 2005, at
p. 175 ff. and p. 243 f.; Boot, Genocide, Crimes Against Humanity, War Crimes, Antwerp,
2002, at p. 500 ff.; C. Rathgeber, The Victimization of Women through Human
Trafficking – an Aftermath of War, in European Journal of Crime, Criminal Law
and Criminal Justice, 2002, p. 2 ff.; O. Swaak-Goldman, Crimes against Humanity,
in McDonald & Swaak-Goldman, Substantive and Procedural Aspects of International
Criminal Law, The Hague, London, Boston, 2000, vol. I, p. 141 ff.
                             2. Human Trafficking: A Crime Against Humanity           11

the ICC at the domestic level, as required by the Statute itself, in light of
the cooperation that States must provide to the Court under the principle
of complementarity16 . It is regrettable that some States have delayed this
process or have not addressed it properly, and that Italy in particular has
still not enacted domestic legislation to comply with the requirements of
the Rome Statute several years after its entry into force17 .

References
Abramson, K. (2003). Beyond Consent, Toward Safeguarding Human Rights: Imple-
   menting the United Nations Trafficking Protocol. Harvard International Law Journal,
   p. 473.
Boot, M. (2002). Genocide, Crimes Against Humanity, War Crimes.Antwerp, p. 500.
Cassese, A. (2002). Crimes against Humanity, in Cassese, Gaeta, Jones (eds.), The Rome
   Statute of the International Criminal Court: a Commentary,vol. I, Oxford, pp. 353-378.
European Union (2002). Framework Decision on combating trafficking in human beings.
   Official Journal of the European Communities, L 203, 1 August 2002, p. 1).
Fitzpatrick, J. (2003). Trafficking as a Human Rights Violation: the Complex Intersection
   of Legal Frameworks for Conceptualizing and Combating Trafficking. Michigan
   Journal of International Law, p. 1143.
Hall, C.K. (1999). Crimes against Humanity. Otto Triffterer (ed.), Commentary on the
   Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, Baden-Baden, p. 160.
Jarvis, M. (2003). An Emerging Gender Perspective on International Crimes. Boas &
   Schabas (eds.), International Criminal Law Developments in the Case Law of the
   ICTY, Leiden, Boston, p. 157.
Khan, K. AA., Dixon, R. & Fulford, A. (2005). Archbold International Criminal Courts,
   London, p. 624.
Mettraux, G. (2005). International Crimes and the ad hoc Tribunals, Oxford, p. 175 and
   p. 243.
Obokata, Q. (2005). Trafficking of Human Beings as a Crime against Humanity: Some
   Implications for the International Legal System. International and Comparative Law
   Quarterly, p. 445.
Potts, L. (2003). Global Trafficking in Human Beings: Assessing the Success of the United
   Nations Protocol to Prevent Trafficking in Persons. George Washington International
   Law Review, p. 227.
Prosecutor v. Dragoljub Kunarac, Radomir Kovac and Zoran Vukovic (Case IT-96-
   23&23/1), Trial Chamber’s Judgment, 22 February 2001 (paras. 539 – 543).
Prosecutor v. Dragoljub Kunarac, Radomir Kovac and Zoran Vukovic
(Case IT-96-23&23/1), Appeals Chamber Judgment 12 June 2002 (paras. 116-124).
Rathgeber, C. (2002). The Victimization of Women through Human Trafficking –
   an Aftermath of War. European Journal of Crime, Criminal Law and Criminal
   Justice, p. 2.


16
   The ICC has jurisdiction only when national systems are “unwilling or unable genuinely
to carry out the investigation or prosecution” over the crimes within the jurisdiction of
the Court (Article 17).
17
   The Treaty was ratified on 12 July 1999 by Law no. 232 (in Official Journal,
Supplement, no. 167, 19 July 1999).
12    Fausto Pocar

Robinson, D. (2001). The Elements for Crimes against Humanity. Lee (ed.), The Inter-
  national Criminal Court, Ardsley p. 57, especially p. 84.
Schabas, W. (2004). An Introduction to the International Criminal Court, Cambridge,
  p. 41
Swaak-Goldman, O. (2000). Crimes against Humanity. McDonald & Swaak-Goldman.
  Substantive and Procedural Aspects of International Criminal Law, The Hague,
  London, Boston, vol. I, p. 141.
Vandenberg, M. (2002). Complicity, Corruption, and Human Rights: Trafficking in
  Human Beings. Case Western Reserve Journal of International Law, p. 323.
3
Trafficking in Human Beings: Uniform
Definitions for Better Measuring
and for Effective Counter-Measures
Kauko Aromaa




Abstract:   Monitoring trafficking in human beings for sexual or other forms of
            exploitation is at present difficult because of the lack of common definitions
            and measuring rules, but also because of a general lack of adequate records
            of the phenomenon. Reasonable measurement would need to combine law
            enforcement and NGO sources for a fuller and more complete review of the
            phenomenon. It is suggested that the Dutch trafficking reporting system be
            taken as a starting point for developing improved monitoring systems.



1.    Introduction
Considering that trafficking in human beings is not a recent phenomenon
(more than 100 years of international concern has been recorded), it is
odd that more has not been done about its measurement. This is striking
given that, as early as 1913, a broad coalition of antitrafficking groups
agreed in Madrid on a joint agenda of future action which, among other
objectives, included the creation of a global databank on victims of
trafficking (Scully, 2001)1 .
   It is generally recognised that the development of a comprehensive
counter-strategy to trafficking in human beings is seriously hindered by
difficulties related to the scarcity, unreliability and non-comparability of
existing data in the various countries (Mon-Eu-Traf II (STOPII), 2004)2 .


1
  Scully, E. (2001). Pre-Cold War Traffic in Sexual Labour and Its Foes: Some Contem-
porary Lessons. In: D. Kyle and R. Koslowski (Eds.): Global Human Smuggling. London:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
2
  Mon-Eu-Traf II (STOPII). (2004). A Study for Monitoring the Trafficking of Human
Beings for the Purpose of Sexual Exploitation in the EU Member States, edited by Andrea
Cauduro and Andrea Di Nicola. Final Report. Brussels: European Commission.


                                                                                       13
14     Kauko Aromaa

   There is also general consensus on there being a need for a structured
monitoring system of crime in this sector, which assesses and quantifies
this illegal activity and provides the same set of quantitative and quali-
tative data for different countries of the world. A request for such a
monitoring system was made by the United Nations in their Protocol on
trafficking in human beings (United Nations, 2000)3 . It is stated that these
data and information should be collected using standardised procedures
and processes, using the same methods, so that they are as reliable as
possible and can be effectively compared between countries. A body of
information of this kind would yield profound knowledge on the problems
and circumstances of people involved in the trade. The data could then
be analysed with the overall goal of devising new solutions at both the
national and international level.
   This may indeed be desirable. However, it is far from likely that the
desired state of affairs will emerge very soon. In the meantime, the
implementation of relevant and effective policy measures should go ahead
without waiting for an improved system of measurement. At this level,
collecting and comparing “best (or good or promising) practices” would
be a very useful way to get ahead, while waiting for better data, which
may take longer than we perhaps expect.
   In this context, it is relevant to mention a related example. A recent
Council of Europe project was able to define a number of promising
novel approaches to combating organised crime, despite a similar problem
of unsatisfactory, incomparable measurement of organised crime across
member countries (Council of Europe, 2004)4 . This is particularly relevant
in the present context since trafficking in human beings, which differs
from human smuggling, resembles (other) organised crime in many
respects (Spencer, Aromaa, Junninen, Markina, Saar, J. and Viljanen,
2006)5 . In effect the Trafficking Protocol of the Palermo Convention
explicitly mentions trafficking as an organised crime problem.
   How uniform the relevant trafficking-related definitions need to be
may also be a relative issue. Consider the situation in regard of many,
or most “traditional” crimes, where fully uniform definitions are equally

3
  United Nations 2000 Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, Supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime (Palermo Protocol; A/RES/55/25).
4
  Combating Organised Crime. Best practice surveys of the Council of Europe. (2004).
Strasbourg: Council of Europe Publishing.
5
  Spencer, J., K Aromaa, K., Junninen, M., Markina, A., Saar, J. and Viljanen, T. (2006).
Organised crime, corruption and the movement of people across borders in the new
enlarged EU: A case study of Estonia, Finland and the UK. HEUNI Papers No. 24.
Helsinki: The European Institute for Crime Prevention and Control, affiliated with the
United Nations (HEUNI)
                                3. Uniform Definitions for Measuring Trafficking   15

lacking: even such a seemingly simple matter as homicide has not been
defined identically across jurisdictions, and yet we are able, to quite a
significant extent, to make measurements and estimations, as well as to
design counter-measures. Definitions and measurement are of course not
irrelevant; but to require perfection from them may be counter-productive.
   It is quite another matter that for significant political action to take
place, (seemingly) reliable quantitative estimates are typically demanded,
as any reallocation of control or support resources is done in the face of
competition, where the “larger” social problem is likely to receive more
than the “smaller” one. It is rather for this reason that formal definitions,
accurate measurement and the like are required.
   Yet, in order to achieve a significant improvement of this state of
affairs, the first step must deal with the issue of definitions. This paper
discusses issues related to definitional matters. I am not going to propose a
set of new standard definitions. It suffices to agree that it is not possible to
collect information and measure a phenomenon across countries without
an agreement on definitions. Divergences in the definitions of the relevant
criminal offences also impair the collection and comparability of data on
trafficking for sexual exploitation.


2.      Trafficking Provisions
As to definitions, these have also varied over time. For the present
purpose, it is convenient to recall the definition given in the trafficking
protocol of the Palermo Convention; I’ll briefly describe just one example
of a national regulation6 based on this, the one adopted in the Finnish
Penal Code7 , which also complies with European Union requirements.
This provision contains two basic elements.
  The first one discusses the methods by which trafficking can be carried
out: this can be done

– by exploiting the dependent status or helplessness of another person;
– by defrauding someone or exploiting his/her misunderstanding;
– paying a remuneration to a person keeping another person in his power,
  or receiving such remuneration.

In an aggravated case, trafficking can take place by using, instead of or in
addition to the previously mentioned methods, violence, threats or deceit.

6
    paragraphs 3 and 3a of the Finnish Penal Code, passed 9.7.2004.
7
    i.e. that the intention of exploitation is sufficient.
16     Kauko Aromaa

The aggravated case, furthermore, comprises situations where another
person is deliberately or through gross neglect made to suffer serious
bodily harm, a serious illness, or danger to life, or other very significant
suffering. A further aggravated variant is if the offence is directed at
somebody who is less than 18 years of age or whose ability to defend
him/herself is significantly reduced. Also, if the offence is committed as
part of the activities of an organised criminal group, this is considered to
be an aggravated case of trafficking. And last, slavery-related activities
are always aggravated cases.
   The second element in the law defines the trafficking itself: to
take somebody in his power, to recruit someone, to deliver, transport,
receive or accommodate someone in order to subject him/her to sexual
exploitation [as defined in the relevant stipulation of the Criminal Code],
to forced labour or other circumstances that violate human rights, or in
order to remove tissues or organs, with the purpose of economic profit.
   Furthermore, if the person concerned is below 18 years of age, then
the act described in the definitional element is trafficking even where
none of the methods described in the first point have been resorted to.
   It has been noted that national law, where the approach of the
Trafficking Protocol of the Palermo Convention has already been adopted,
does not define trafficking in a fully uniform way across countries, even
thoughthe model has been taken from the same basic sources. This lack
of uniformity - to say nothing of situations where national law has not yet
been revised according to these principles8 - has given rise to complaints
concerning difficulties of international co-operation in investigations:
there are serious obstacles to co-operation if the crime definitions are
broader in one country than in another. If investigations are hampered,
then data collection also suffers as the scope of behaviour comprised in
the different national data sources is dissimilar.
   The difficulty here may be related to the particularly complex character of
the offence: “trafficking”, like for instance “organised crime”, is a complex
concept, not as readily suitable for counting in the same way we are able
to count, say, corpses, or persons killed. The situation where a crime is
characterised by an absence of unity in respect of time, place, perpetrator and
activity makes the counting exercise particularly demanding. The dilemma
is quite similar to measurement problems related to organised crime9 . And


8
  This observation would indeed underline the need for a rapid introduction of relevant
provisions in many European jurisdictions.
9
  How has the organised crime problem of measurement been solved? In the Council of
Europe, an expert group on organised crime (1997-2003) tried to cope with the counting
and definitional problems when putting together organised crime situation reports from
                                  3. Uniform Definitions for Measuring Trafficking            17

on top of the observable behaviour, the crime also requires the subjective
purpose (“in order to”) and the profit motive.
  Whether it is satisfactory to solve the dilemma in a similar fashion
as with the Council of Europe organised crime situation report, would
depend on the relevant interests of knowledge: what is it necessary to
know about trafficking in human beings in order

(1)   to organise and target the counter-work, for
(2)   designing cost-effective counter-measures, for
(3)   planning and carrying out control, and for
(4)   identifying the victims and for
(5)   meeting their needs?

Obviously, these are five different questions with a different focus. The
answers, consequently, are also likely to be different. The core difference
is related to the question whether the interest is directed at

– prevention of victimisation and victim protection or
– exploitation and organised crime prevention and control.

It is a fair expectation that criminal reports should be drafted in a form
that allows for concrete interpretations at law enforcement level - it
is at this level that decisions regarding interventions and recording are
taken, and abstract formulations may practically speaking prohibit both
effective measures, and, indeed, a sensible observation and recording
of the target phenomenon. Some recent criminal law amendments in
Finland - and obviously in a number of other EU member states and other
countries - have been designed in a way that does not meet this simple
basic requirement very well. One example is the provision criminalising
membership of criminal organisations; another is trafficking in human
beings.
   In practical terms, there has not been much experience of how the
relevant trafficking provisions can be applied and /or where possible
weaknesses in the investigation methods may be found. This data source
would mainly be recording and counting trafficking offences, criminal


European countries. A great diversity of reporting was found and therefore very different
figures for the volume of organised crime groups and of the persons involved were reported.
The closest to repeatability that was found was for a few countries that had pragmatically
decided to apply the logic of counting “investigations”. This may be a realistic solution,
recalling that law enforcement statistics actually are and continue to be, in the first place and
by the nature of their production process, working statistics of law enforcement bodies,
and only in a secondary sense descriptions of “crimes” that occurred and were observed
and reported to occur in the field.
18     Kauko Aromaa

group involvement, investigations. Typically, law enforcement sources
have had little to give with regard to victim issues. As far as trafficking
is concerned, they have not succeeded ín capturing very many cases,
either. This, however, does not necessarily mean that criminalisation as
a piece of legislation is at fault, but rather indicates the existence of
other problems, such as the elusive nature of the target and the massive
difficulties of securing victim-witness co-operation.
   In order to get some first-hand orientation, I have interviewed a few
Finnish police investigators who have had at least some experience in
trying to work with the new legislation in practice. One police officer
thought that the legal definitions are very useful: as they are very
broad,
“it is easy to find at least something that you can pin on them”.

There are practical difficulties such as that
“it is hard to get timely information from abroad, partly because definitions are not
identical; it may take months to get a reply, and in the meantime we’ll need to let them
go”.

One investigator pointed out that co-operation is hard to get as
“victims do not want to be defined as victims”.

Furthermore, it was seen as a fundamental problem that
“at the border, the offence has mostly not yet taken place, so what can you do?”

The respondent was very clear about this:
“Only if the victims have been forced, they may seek help already at the border. But
even then, intimidation and the negative experience they have with the authorities may
prevent this.”

Another investigator noted that
“internal trafficking is harder as we can only find out about that by special intelligence
and surprise raids, both requiring a lot of resources and impossible to keep up as a
standard approach.”

Professional scepticism also came into the picture, as one respondent said
it is a major problem that in the face of unclear evidence one remembers
that
“asylum is also often misused”.

Considering that these interviews were made only in passing, the reactions
would encourage a broader and more systematic utilisation of police
investigator experience with the object of studying the pitfalls of existing
                                3. Uniform Definitions for Measuring Trafficking        19

trafficking legislation, in order to understand what the shortcomings as to
its implementation may be and what, perhaps, could be done to eliminate
them.
   The first type of information, as explained above, was the author-
ities’ working statistics. The second type of information source is
NGOs together with authorities whose focus is on (illegal) immigrants
(immigration authorities, border guard). Their common denominator is
that each deals with potential or presumed victims.
   It is the co-operation between law enforcement and victim-focused
NGOs providing support for victims that achieves better results, both in
controlling traffficking and helping the victims. In effect, a key issue for
investigations is the victim’s co-operation because without the statements
of victims, an investigation is on a fragile basis. As a policeman explained:
“it is very hard to identify a victim who does not co-operate, or, as often happens, denies
his/her victim status, does not accept our view of him/her as a potential or real victim.
Then he/she has no reason to co-operate, on the contrary, he/she will try to escape,
even though we are trying to help him/her. It is also clear that if the victim’s role is
not beneficial to the presumed victim, he/she will have no reason to come to us - all
we then do is send him/her back and he/she knows this. The only way to improve this
situation could be if we would adopt a solution where the victim status is accompanied
by some significant benefits - such as a permit to stay in the country, witness protection
schemes, etc.”

NGOs may be compiling some kind of working statistics about their
clients, visits, and measures taken - by their nature these are working
statistics similar to police statistics. Volume estimates are indeed often
derived from such sources. What is being counted is incomplete and
heterogeneous, and therefore, hard to interpret or even to add together. It
would desirable if NGOs could adopt some shared counting rules, starting
with shared definitions that are suitable for their work and can be derived
from it, in the context of client routines. They should agree on who is a
client and when there is a [suspected] trafficking victim. Counting rules
and definitions go hand in hand– for, in order to count victims, we need
to have definitions of how to count them. Also we need to agree on what
other issues could be counted that can be derived from the victims, and
how far the NGO or the victim-focused authority can go when trying to
make the presumed victim disclose facts about the exploitation process,
the exploiters, routes and methods of recruitment, transport, hideouts,
about routes, other victims involved, etc.: the presumed victim is a poten-
tially valuable informer who sometimes may be very knowledgeable,
sometimes very ignorant. This observation means that we need to define
what information an NGO and a victim-focused authority should try to
collect as a standard routine.
20    Kauko Aromaa

3.   The Problem of Data and Sources
Speaking of data. The major problem in studying and combating
trafficking in persons is the scarcity, unreliability, and non-comparability
of existing international and national data. Accurate information
especially on the volume of the crime does not exist. Some of the major
reasons for this are (Lehti and Aromaa, 2006)10 :

1) The absence of comparable statistics on reported crimes, indictments
   and court cases, as well as of the numbers of victims involved [also,
   our traditional crime statistics are strikingly poor with regard to infor-
   mation on victims]
2) The heterogeneous criminalisation of the crime of trafficking in
   women/ human beings in the legislation of nation states
3) The characteristics of trafficking (as organised - and in part transna-
   tional - crime), which result in a high dark number and make
   trafficking hard to identify, to control. and to prevent (i.e. because this
   crime is, for several reasons, not readily reported to the police; and
   because police have few other possibilities of finding out about such
   crimes - they may try to work proactively and make raids in suspected
   places of accommodation or work of trafficked/exploited persons but
   this is rarely done and consumes a lot of resources11 );
4) The weak legal status of the victims in the legislation of most nation
   states, which contributes to their reluctance to report the crimes or
   to co-operate with the authorities during the investigation and court
   proceedings;
5) The inconsistent use of the concept of trafficking in women/ persons
   in both international and national context.

Not only do the definitions differ from country to country and from
scholar to scholar, but there is also a major lack of comparable quanti-
tative and qualitative data regarding different countries and collected
and processed using similar definitions, procedures and methods. The
obvious consequence of this lack of data is a lack of standardisation:
scholars studying these issues have had to resort to indirect sources and
to construct their own operational models in order to get at least a little
closer to the elusive target, as direct and uniform data cannot be found.


10
   Lehti, M. and Aromaa, K. (2006). Trafficking for Sexual Exploitation. In: M. Tonry
(Ed.), Crime and Justice. A Review of Research. Vol. 34. Chicago and London: The
University of Chicago Press (forthcoming).
11
   see the comments received in interviews with police (passage 5 above)
                           3. Uniform Definitions for Measuring Trafficking   21

Therefore, the present situation is NOT a signal of failure but, on the
contrary, rather indicates that many bright minds have been concentrating
on this challenging topic for quite some time.
   Despite a certain improvement in recent years, the statistics and
research both on illegal immigration, prostitution - both often used as
proxies when assessing trafficking -, and trafficking continue to remain
highly unsatisfactory even inside the European Union where a uniform
definition has been agreed upon, along the lines of the TOC Protocol, to
say nothing about the situation at international/ global level. Very little
is known about numbers of illegal migrants or migrating prostitutes who
may have used the services of traffickers and/or may have been exploited
by them. Similarly, hardly any data are available about the numbers and
characteristics of individuals working in/for criminal groups involved
in trafficking. The problem becomes even worse if one tries to obtain
statistics on the numbers and characteristics of the various categories
of trafficked persons. Hence, even in the EU member countries, at the
moment only estimates are obtainable about the extent of trafficking in
persons and in most cases it is not clear how these estimates have been
reached. The situation at the international level is even more obscure.
   According to a study conducted by the IOM in Europe in 1998 (IOM
1998), the main sources of data on the phenomenon were the statistics
of the police, border guard authority, and [im]migration authority. The
situation has not changed much or at all in the last seven-eight years.
According to the second Mon-Eu-Traf study conducted in 2004, infor-
mation on trafficking in the EU member countries was still mainly
obtained either from general crime statistics or from general migration
statistics, and usually scattered in several different - often non-comparable
- national databases. According to the IOM study, 18 out of the surveyed
25 countries had no data at all on trafficking in children, 13 had none
on trafficking in women, and 11 none on trafficking in general. Only
11 countries had statistics on the number of convictions for trafficking
(IOM 1998). Furthermore, in several countries, the existing databases are
- at least partly - confidential, and their information cannot be utilised
for any other purpose than an investigative one (Mon-EU-Traf II). On
the other hand, because the databases are created for other objectives
besides criminological research or situation assessments, or the research
of trafficking, the collected data is usully overly general, non-specific.
The same data forms are used for every offence, which means that crime-
specific data is usually not collected at all. The other major shortcoming
in the crime statistics data is that their main focus are on offences and
offenders; information on victims or circumstances are rarely recorded.
However, the numbers and characteristics of the victims are of utmost
22    Kauko Aromaa

importance not only for understanding trends in trafficking but also
for producing reliable estimates of the total of trafficked persons, and
hindering/preventing/disturbing the trafficking process. In the present
situation, this kind of data are practically non-existent in Europe or in
any other region.
   The role of NGOs is often viewed as being highly relevant for learning
about trafficking. Systematised data bases kept by NGOs are according
to the Mon-EU-Traf study (2004)12 rare in the EU member countries, and
it may be assumed that they are not common elsewhere either; however,
some Eastern European source/transit countries have been encouraged and
supported to develop special anti-trafficking programmes where data are
also collected. In many countries (such as Finland, Italy, the Netherlands,
Spain) NGOs possess significant information, but the problem is, on one
hand, how this information could be made available for research and co-
ordinated with the data from other sources– and, on the other, how NGOs
could agree on standard recording and reporting principles, procedures,
definitions and classifications when this seems to have been impossible
even at the authority sources level.
   If this, however, could be done, the result would be more and better
information on the numbers, characteristics and needs of victims - and,
perhaps, also on the trafficking process and the traffickers and their
modi operandi and organisations, and the money involved, and the
modes of exploitation. NGOs could provide not only highly detailed
qualitative information on victims but also quantitative data on, for
example:

a) the number of trafficked women/persons who come into contact with
   NGOs every year;
b) the ratio between trafficked women/persons and foreign prostitutes
   and other clandestine workers;
c) the number of trafficked women/ persons granted staying permits
   under social protection programmes.

This is information that should be secured and data that should be gathered
on the basis of common standards among NGOs, and disseminated for
research and policy purposes. At the moment, the data collecting and
storage systems of most NGOs working in the field in Europe are unsatis-
factory. Outside Europe, the problems are identical: dissimilar definitions,


12
   Mon-Eu-Traf II (STOPII). (2004). A. Cauduro (Ed.), A Study for Monitoring the
Trafficking of Human Beings for the Purpose of Sexual Exploitation in the EU Member
States. Final Report. Brussels: European Commission.
                            3. Uniform Definitions for Measuring Trafficking   23

non-comparable, poor and scattered data sources, and a very large number
of estimates whose origins are obscure (Mon-Eu-Traf II).
   How NGOs could improve their act in this respect is also not clear.
Traditional police work often does not value systematic data collection,
complaining that this is “just for the statistics”. Very similarly, there may
often be even less motivation among NGOs for developing a uniform
recording and reporting outline. This is because they are preoccupied with
helping the victims rather than collecting data for research and policy
purposes, usually seen as something that cannot be their responsibility.
The problem may also be inflated since NGO staff and volunteers mostly
have no professional qualifications in data collection and the production
of statistics.
   If this is the case, external support, recommendations and material
support by governments for NGOs to secure valuable data would perhaps
be called for - otherwise it is likely that there will be little progess in this
matter.
   Serious problems are to be found not only in the organisation of
statistics, quantitative data and estimates but also in the collected quali-
tative data and information. The most detailed information on charac-
teristics of trafficked persons are to be found in the IOM and UNICRI
surveys on the situation in the former Socialist countries and in some
African and Asian countries (IOM 2000-2004; Trafficking of Nigerian
girls to Italy 2004; Travnickova 2004), as well as in the Mon-Eu-Traf
studies, the latter of which comprised most of the “old” EU countres
(EU15). However, this information also (even at its best) is based on a
very small number of cases and victims and covers only short periods
of time. Some authors have also criticised the studies because of the
uncritical way they treat their sources. The narratives of interviewed
victims are usually accepted at face value and their stories and claims
are not controlled or checked in any way (Legget 2004, 3). It should
also be noted that most of the studies available are focused on the
situation in the former Socialist countries. It is not self-evident - not
even likely - that one can generalise the information and research results
from these places to apply to the phenomenon as a whole all over
the world.
   Despite their shortcomings, the IOM and UNICRI studies are at the
moment the most reliable overview sources on the situation in various
countries. Another widely cited source is the annual Trafficking in
Persons Report of the US State Department. It is put together using
local contacts and sources and the data it includes are, thus, of uneven
quality.
24     Kauko Aromaa

4.    Conclusions
As long as both the quantitative and qualitative information on trafficking
in persons is scarce, unreliable and non-comparable, it will be difficult to
develop effective and efficient counter-strategies even regionally, not to
mention at the international level. The emphasis, in respect of the control
of all forms of organised crime, is at the moment on reducing the legal and
illegal opportunities for criminal activities. What is essential for reducing
these opportunitues is a profound knowledge of the ways in which illegal
activities develop/ emerge; in the case of trafficking in persons this
requires readily accesible, up-to-date, comparable qualitative information
- intelligence - on the whole trafficking chain - recruitment, transportation,
exploitation, organisations, clients, victims (Mon-Eu-Traf II).
   The data collection model which could be used with minor adjustments
as a basis for a comparable European, and even international, database is
that adopted in the Netherlands. There, the Dutch national rapporteur’s
report provides a rather comprehensive overview of the situation Council
of Europe, 2004)13 . The information is, among other sources, derived
from an official confidential database called the Central registration of
victims of trafficking, which is being kept by the Foundation against
Trafficking in Women (STV), a non-governmental organisation. Police
have to report every victim they encounter to the STV, which collects
in a computerised database information, for instance about the gender,
age, country of origin, language, children, travelling documents, place
of residence, form of prostitution, age of recruitment, legal assistance in
the Netherlands, number of asylum requests and grants of the victims.
In addition, the database records requests for financial compensation, if
the victim is in the Netherlands, and if not, the reason for his/her return;
return assistance is also recorded.


Appendix
In the relevant literature where volume estimates have been presented,
prostitution seems to be a major concept. Thus, many estimates start out
from a count of prostitutes (also undefined!) and then presume that some
acceptable percentage of these have “probably” been trafficked. Forced
labour is very often a non-issue.


13
  Co-operation against trafficking in human beings. (2004). In: Combating Organised
Crime. Best Practice Surveys of the Council of Europe, 213-245. Strasbourg: Council of
Europe Publishing.
                           3. Uniform Definitions for Measuring Trafficking   25

   Existing work such as the STOP reports suggests just three basic kinds
of indicators, each of which requires an underlying definition:

1) yearly number of victims
2) yearly maximum turnover from the sale of trafficked people to
   exploiters, i.e. the profits (should be proceeds) of criminals who
   transfer foreign persons from one country to another in order to procure
   prostitutes for exploiters in destination countries,
3) yearly maximum turnover from the sexual exploitation of persons
   trafficked.

For these, we would need to have acceptable working definitions of
victim, exploitation, trafficker, proceeds/profits, price of smuggling/
transportation + related services,
   How to recognise potential victims is a prevention and assistance issue,
how to count them is a definitional and counting rules issue. One could
count daily cross-sections or annual flows (like with prisoner counts).
Unresolved however remains the question of how to deal with irregular,
part-time, or recurrent exploitation. Other definitional and counting issues
reflect dilemmas such as

– who are traffickers? Are traffickers all persons who participate in the
  process at any stage?
– should only cross border or transnational trafficking be counted?
  How should one count a trafficking chain crossing several borders,
  with source, transit and destination countries? Different estimates use
  different solutions.
– how should proceeds be counted? Perhaps similar solutions could be
  developed to those applied to the drug money problem - where also
  significant difficulties and inconsistencies are the rule

In our assessment of what is known about trafficking, we can distinguish
quite a lot (implicit) operational models linked to the phenomenon. This
is true despite the fact that there is, in principle, a commonly accepted
definition of trafficking that is typically derived from the TOC trafficking
protocol. Thus, a standard definition does exist but figures/counts and
qualitative descriptions are not derived from this definition. Instead, as is
normally the case, different kinds of “proxies” are used that are thought to
be useful operational models linked to the different aspects of trafficking.
   It is also true of course that not everybody is strictly adhering to
the identical definition, as national law often does not recognise the
offence at all - as was the case in most European countries just some
years ago. Also, the definitions adopted in existing national legislation
26     Kauko Aromaa

are not always strictly identical with the TOC protocol definition. The
TOC protocol definition is also quite complex - this resembles the law
enforcer’s dilemma with organised crime which is often solved by saying
“it is difficult to define it in exact operational terms, but we recognise it
when we see it - we know what it is when we see it”. This will of course
result in non-uniform recording and measurement.

References
Scully, E. (2001). Pre-Cold War Traffic in Sexual Labour and Its Foes: Some Contem-
   porary Lessons. In: D. Kyle and R. Koslowski (Eds.): Global Human Smuggling.
   London: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Mon-Eu-Traf II (STOPII). (2004). A Study for Monitoring the Trafficking of Human
   Beings for the Purpose of Sexual Exploitation in the EU Member States, edited by
   Andrea Cauduro and Andrea Di Nicola. Final Report. Brussels: European Commission.
United Nations. (2000). Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
   Especially Women and Children, Supplementing the United Nations Convention
   against Transnational Organized Crime (Palermo Protocol; A/RES/55/25).
Combating Organised Crime. Best practice surveys of the Council of Europe. (2004).
   Strasbourg: Council of Europe Publishing
J. Spencer, K. Aromaa, M. Junninen, A. Markina, J. Saar and T. Viljanen. (2006).
   Organised crime, corruption and the movement of people across borders in the new
   enlarged EU: A case study of Estonia, Finland and the UK. HEUNI Papers No. 24.
   Helsinki: The European Institute for Crime Prevention and Control, affiliated with the
   United Nations (HEUNI)
M. Lehti and K. Aromaa. (2006). Trafficking for Sexual Exploitation. In: M. Tonry
   (Ed.), Crime and Justice. A Review of Research. Vol. 34. Chicago and London: The
   University of Chicago Press (forthcoming).
Co-operation against trafficking in human beings. (2004). In: Combating Organised
   Crime. Best Practice Surveys of the Council of Europe, 213-245. Strasbourg: Council
   of Europe Publishing.
4
Collecting Data on Human Trafficking:
Availability, Reliability
and Comparability of Trafficking Data
Kristiina Kangaspunta




Abstract:   During recent years, there has been a boom in information on trafficking
            in persons. However, reliability of data remains a problem with most data
            sources. If figures on trafficking are given, they are often based on estimates
            of the level of trafficking and, usually, no explanation is given on how
            these figures were calculated. In many cases, they are used for advocacy or
            fund-raising purposes. Data collection on human trafficking is complicated
            and reliable data is still difficult to find.



1.   Introduction
Some existing data collection initiatives gather information globally1 .
These initiatives usually focus on legislation, victim assistance, trafficking
routes and other related information. Because of the nature of the infor-
mation, in most cases data is not comparable. There are well known
problems that are common to all efforts to gather comparative data on
crime, such as imprecise definitions, improper classifications and differ-
ences in units of measurement. With “new forms of crime”, such as
trafficking, most of the traditional methods of collecting data cannot be
applied.
   One of the major hurdles to undertaking a comparative analysis is the
lack of specific legislation on trafficking in persons. This leads to the
absence of official criminal justice statistics on human trafficking cases

1
  E.g. Innocenti Research Centre of UNICEF; ILO; UNESCO; IOM; UNHCR, The
Protection Project at the Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International
Studies; and Trafficking in Persons Reports of the Department of State of the United
States of America.


                                                                                        27
28     Kristiina Kangaspunta

including the number of police-recorded crimes, and number of persons
prosecuted and convicted. In countries where legislation on trafficking in
persons is available, the legal definitions may vary from one country to
another and official statistics may include only some types of trafficking
crime.
   The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime2 , adopted in
November 2000 by the United Nations General Assembly, has improved
the situation because, for the first time, the international community has
adopted an agreed definition of human trafficking3 . Several countries
have already reformed their legislation in order to comply with the
definition. It can be expected that this will lead also to more harmo-
nized practice in recording crime, allowing collection and comparison of
trafficking data.
   The Convention against Transnational Organized Crime is also supple-
mented by the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land,
Sea and Air4 , including a definition of such smuggling. It is important
to stress the difference between the definition of human trafficking and
migrant smuggling is important to stress because in some countries there
is no clear distinction between trafficking and smuggling cases, either
administratively or in official statistics. This is usually due to the lack
of clear legal definitions of these crimes and could result in the under-
recording of trafficking crimes as the police might prefer to categorise
some of trafficking cases as smuggling crimes. Often, the collection of
evidence on crimes related with the smuggling of migrants is easier than
obtaining evidence on offences related to trafficking in persons. Few
countries publish official statistics on trafficking cases, making the global
comparison of these statistics very difficult.



2
  Full text of the Convention and the Protocols can be found at: http://www.unodc.org/
unodc/en/crime_cicp_convention.html
3
  “Trafficking in persons” shall mean the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring
or receipt of persons, by means of threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, of
abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability
or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person
having control over another person, for the purpose of exploitation. Exploitation shall
include, at a minimum, the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of
sexual exploitation, forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery,
servitude or the removal of organs. (A/RES/55/25)
4
  “Smuggling of migrants” shall mean the procurement, in order to obtain, directly or
indirectly, a financial or other material benefit, of the illegal entry of a person into a State
Party of which the person is not a national or a permanent resident. (A/RES/55/25)
                                        4. Collecting Data on Human Trafficking        29

2.    Statistics
Even though official crime statistics do not reflect the actual levels of
crime, they can give valuable information on the operation of criminal
justice systems. In some countries, crime statistics on trafficking in
persons are published regularly5 . Interesting results can be drawn from
this data, particularly at the national level, on the flow of cases through
the criminal justice system. However, comparative analyses involving
several countries would need a careful analysis of the corresponding legis-
lation, statistical practices and differences in defining criminal incidents
in countries involved (Joutsen, 1998)6 .
   The existence of hidden numbers of crime, including all those crimes
which are not reported to the authorities, is a well known phenomenon.
These figures include, particularly, cases of rape and violence against
women. For such crimes, victimization surveys give more reliable figures
on the true level of crime. In these surveys, a sample of people are
asked about their victimization experiences over a certain period of time.
International Crime Victim Survey (ICVS) (Alvazzi del Frate, 2003)7 and
International Violence against Women Survey (IVAWS) (Mouzos and
Makkai, 2004)8 are examples of such research.
   Even though general victimization surveys can give a better under-
standing of the levels of crime, they cannot be used to collect data on the
number of trafficking victims because, as far as we are aware, the crime
is generally not common enough to be represented in a small sample
of the population. However, a focused victimization study on trafficking
experiences could be carried out among, for example, young women
from developing countries returning from abroad. Several analyses have
been made of data collected from clients of service-providers. A good

5
  See, for example, Trafficking in Human Beings, First (2002), Second (2003), Third
(2005) and Fourth (2005) Report of the National Rapporteur, NRM, Den Haag;
Bundeskriminalamt, Trafficking in Human Beings: Situation Report 1999 - 2004;
Situation Report no 1-5, Trafficking in Women, National Criminal Investigation
Department, National Criminal Intelligence Service, Illegal Immigration Unit, RKP, KUT
Rapport, 1998 – 2002, Sweden.
6
  See Joutsen, Matti, Introduction in Kangaspunta, Joutsen, Ollus (ed.), Crime and
Criminal Justice Systems in Europe and North America 1990-1994, HEUNI, 1998,
Helsinki.
7
  See Alvazzi del Frate, Anna, The voice of victims of crime: estimating the true level of
conventional crime, Forum on Crime and Society, Vol 3, Nos 1 and 2, Decemebr 2003,
UNODC.
8
  See http://www.heuni.fi/12859.htm; Mouzos, Jenny & Makkai, Toni, Women’s Experi-
ences of Male Violence. Findings from the Australian Component of the Interna-
tional Violence Against Women Survey (IVAWS). Australian Institute of Criminology,
Research and Public Policy Series No. 56, 2004.
30     Kristiina Kangaspunta

example of such an initiative is the data collected by the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) using a standardized methodology
(Laczko, 2002)9 .
   When estimating the hidden number of trafficking crimes, keeping in
mind that the majority of known trafficking victims are women (UNODC,
2006)10 , it might be informative to look at the reporting practices of
women in general and their relationship with affluence. When reporting
practices of women are compared with the human development indicators,
it can be noted that women from less developed countries tend to report
less in general than women who live in more affluent countries (figure 1).
Trafficking victims are usually recruited from poor countries where
women are reporting fewer crimes. In addition, trafficking victims are
often even more reluctant than other victims to report crimes because of
the fear of retaliation by traffickers or deportation by authorities. It can
therefore be expected that most trafficking crimes of this nature never
come to the attention of authorities.
   So far, trafficking of women and children, particularly for sexual
exploitation, has dominated national and international discussions
concerning human trafficking. Trafficking for forced labour has received
limited attention, and the identification of trafficking victims who are
exploited through forced labour has been even less successful than in the
case of sexual exploitation. In addition, the identification of male victims
who might be expected to be trafficked for forced labour purposes has
not been successful in many countries.
   One reason for low numbers of reported cases involving forced labour
and male victims is connected to trafficking legislation which, in many
countries, is restricted only to sexual exploitation. In this case, forced
labour cases are not classified as human trafficking crimes and, as a result,
they are not included in statistics or reports. In addition, many victim
support organizations provide services only for women and child victims.
So it could be assumed that the number of male victims particularly
trafficked for forced labour is under-estimated. In some countries where
the trafficking legislation covers also labour exploitation and services are



9
   See Laczko, Frank, Human Trafficking: The Need for Better Data. Migration Infor-
mation Source. Data Insight, 2002. http ://www.migrationinformation.org; Omelaniuk,
Irena, Trafficking in persons: nature and logistics, Case study –Balkans. Presentation at
the ISPAC Conference on “Trafficking: Networks and Logistics of Transnational Crime
and International Terrorism”, Courmayeur, Italy, 2002.
10
    United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Trafficking in Persons: Global Patterns,
UNODC, 2006, Vienna, Austria.
                                                                        4. Collecting Data on Human Trafficking                   31

                                                                                                Netherlands
                                                                                              Sweden          Cloud is jittered
                                                                               Switzerland
                               0.95
                                                           Japan
                                                                                                              Linear Regression
                                                              Italy Canada          France
                                                                               United States Belgium
Human Development Index 2003




                                                                   Finland Australia       Denmark
                               0.90                                    Austria
                                                          Slovenia                        New Zealand
                                                     Portugal      Malta



                               0.85
                                                                           Slovak Republic
                                                           Lithuania       Czech Republic
                                                       Poland
                                                      Estonia
                               0.80




                               0.75
                                      Georgia

                                           30.00         40.00             50.00          60.00
                                                ICVS: females report to police all crimes

Figure 4.1. Crimes reported to the police by women by Human Development Index
(Kangaspunta, 2005)11 .


not restricted to women and children, several male victims have entered
the victim protection programmes12 .


3.                              Collecting Global Data
Despite the many complications in collecting data on human trafficking,
UNODC has recently made its first attempt at collecting and analyzing
data at the global level. The Global Database on Trafficking Trends was


11
   Kangaspunta, Kristiina, Data Collection on Human Trafficking, Presentation at the
high-level panel entitled “Remaining challenges in relation to statistics and indicators,
building on the discussions at the high-level round table organized in the 48th session of
the Commission on the Status of Women 2004 as well as available data from the World’s
Women: Trends and Statistics (2005) and the World Survey on the Role of Women in
Development 2005” held during the 49th session of the Commission on the Status of
Women, 2005, New York.
12
   See European Commission, Research based on case studies of victims of trafficking
in human beings in 3 EU Member States, i.e. Belgium, Italy and The Netherlands,
Commission of the European Communities, DG Justice & Home Affairs, Hippokrates
JA/2001/HIP/023.
32      Kristiina Kangaspunta

                                   Media
                      NGOs          5%                 Governmental Institutions
                       18%                                     27%




Research Institutes
      18%
                                                    International Organizations
                                                               32%

Figure 4.2. Reported human trafficking information by classification of the source14 .

established under the Global Programme against Trafficking in Human
Beings (GPAT) of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) in order to systematically collect and collate open source
information on trafficking in persons13 . A broad range of sources was
scrutinized for information on trafficking trends and routes, victim’s
and offender’s characteristics and criminal justice responses. The main
sources include official reports from governments, information dissem-
inated by inter- and non-governmental organizations, research reports,
conference material and media reports (Figure 2).
   The database collects both qualitative and quantitative information
about human trafficking. Data was provided on 161 countries and special
administrative territories by 113 source institutions including over 400
documents. If a country was mentioned once in a document generated
by one source institution as either a transit, origin or destination country,
it appears in the Trafficking Database. In the same way, each time a
variable (for example, whether the victims were children or adults; male
or female; whether exploitation was in the sex sector or labour market;
whether the offender was male or female) was mentioned, it was entered
once in the Trafficking Database.
   When analyzing the information included in the database, a citation
index was built as a tool by which variables included in the database
were analyzed. The index indicates the number of sources reporting
an information variable concerning a particular country according to a
5-point scale, from very low to very high, in comparison to all other

13
   See Kangaspunta Kristiina, Mapping the inhuman trade: Preliminary findings of the
database on trafficking in human beings, Forum on Crime and Society, Vol 3, Nos 1 and
2, Decemebr 2003, UNODC
14
   United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (2006), Trafficking in Persons: Global
Patterns, UNODC, Vienna, Austria, p. 37
                                         4. Collecting Data on Human Trafficking   33

countries (e.g. information indicating that a specific country or territory
is an origin, transit or destination of trafficking in persons). In other
words, the citation index allowed the categorization of countries by using
a citation category from very low to very high. Based on the citation
index, 161 countries could be categorized as very high, high, medium,
low or very low as countries of origin, transit or destination.15
   The results of the analyses of the UNODC database, published in the
UNODC report on Trafficking in Persons: Global Patterns in 2006, are
hardly surprising, as they mainly confirm already existing knowledge.
Victims are typically recruited from poor or politically and economically
unstable countries, transported through countries that provide geographi-
cally expedient routes and exploited in more affluent parts of the world.
Where the compiling of reported information does break ground is in
confirming that trafficking in persons touches nearly all countries in the
world. In the database, 127 countries were reported to be origin countries,
98 transit countries and 137 destination countries. At the regional level,
the Commonwealth of Independent States, Central and South Eastern
Europe, West Africa and South-Eastern Asia are the most reported origin
regions. Countries within Central and South Eastern Europe and Western
Europe are highly reported transit regions, and countries in Western
Europe, North America and Asia, particularly in Western Asia, are
reported more frequently as destination countries.
   According to the citation index, the following eleven countries
score very high as countries of origin (listed in alphabetical order):
Albania, Belarus, Bulgaria, China, Lithuania, Nigeria, the Republic of
Moldova, Romania, the Russian Federation, Thailand and Ukraine. Six
countries score very high as transit countries (in alphabetical order):
Albania, Bulgaria, Hungary, Italy, Poland, and Thailand. Ten countries
score very high as destinations for trafficked victims (in alphabetical
order): Belgium, Germany, Greece, Israel, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands,
Thailand, Turkey and the United States of America.
   Adult women are most frequently reported to be victims of trafficking,
followed by girls, children, boys and men. When combined, the
categories, ‘children’, ‘girls’ and ‘boys’ comprise almost one half of those
sources reporting details of victims in the database.
   The purpose of human trafficking is reported to be mainly sexual
exploitation in all regions. However, there are regional differences in the
reporting of sexual exploitation and forced labour. In Central and South
Eastern Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean, Western Europe and
the Commonwealth of Independent States, sexual exploitation is very

15
     For detailed information on the methodology, see ibid, pp. 109-122.
34       Kristiina Kangaspunta

highly reported. In Africa, forced labour cases are reported by nearly 40%
of the sources and, in Asia, Oceania and North America, forced labour
is also frequently reported. Where sources expressly report exploitation
of girls, this tends to be for sexual exploitation purposes, while forced
labour is reported more frequently among boys.16
   The nationality and sex of traffickers was also reviewed. The largest
number of reported references are to nationals of Asia, followed by
Central and South Eastern Europe and then Western Europe. Reports also
indicate that human trafficking groups include men and women operating
together, as well as men- and women-only groups.


4.      Conclusions
There are many complications in collecting data on human trafficking.
The first attempt of UNODC to collect and analyze data at the global
level – with all its limitations - is encouraging. Systematically documented
quantitative and qualitative data can provide important information for
policy making as well as theory formulation. At an international level,
global data collection, based on the identification of the countries reported
to be involved in human trafficking, is useful for planning and evaluation
purposes. Analyzing reported patterns can give valuable information on
the nature and situation of trafficking, such as origin, transit and desti-
nation countries, as well as involvement of crime groups in different
countries and the main routes used. This knowledge can be used when
developing cooperation between practitioners in the fields of prevention,
victim assistance and criminal justice responses, and monitoring the
impact of these actions.
   In addition, carefully collected and analyzed national and regional data
might yield profiles useful for developing regional cooperation in the fight
against human trafficking. One of the main findings based on the analysis
of the UNODC Trafficking Database is that focused effort to collect
country level information is needed. At a national level, more emphasis
should be placed on the recording and publishing of information on the
trafficking crimes processed through the criminal justice system. This
would allow the evaluation of the effectiveness of the police, prosecutors
and judiciary in dealing with traffickers. At the same time, reliable data
on trafficked persons and their support, protection and care should be
collected and published in order to identify gaps and responses to the
needs of victims. Cooperation between authorities and civil society is

16
     Ibid, pp.80-81.
                                       4. Collecting Data on Human Trafficking        35

elementary in this type of data collection. The United Nations Member
States should formalize national structures to collect and disseminate such
data to allow more detailed situation analysis and reliable comparisons
between countries.
   The UNODC data was collected on reported cases of human trafficking.
There may be several reasons why a country is profiling high based
on the used methodology, including the comprehensiveness of various
national legal definitions of human trafficking, the availability and quality
of official statistics and reporting, the availability and quality of national
structures for victim identification and assistance, or the extent of bi-
and multi-lateral cooperation. Several countries have expressed their
concerns about their country being rated as having a comparatively signif-
icant trafficking problem, based on the reported cases. Even though the
question on how much does the reporting reflect the reality and severity
of trafficking in one country remains open, the first action against human
trafficking at the country level is the acknowledgment of the problem.
Further, cooperation between countries, the international community and
civil society is needed in order to assess the real scale and scope of the
human trafficking at the national, regional and global level.


References
A/RES/55/25. General Assembly resolution 55/25 of December 2000.
Alvazzi del Frate, Anna. (2003). The voice of victims of crime: estimating the true level
   of conventional crime, Forum on Crime and Society, Vol 3, Nos 1 and 2, December
   2003, UNODC.
Bundeskriminalamt, Trafficking in Human Beings: Situation Report 1999 – 2004,
   Wiesbaden.
European Commission. (2001). Research based on case studies of victims of trafficking
   in human beings in 3 EU Member States, i.e. Belgium, Italy and The Netherlands,
   Commission on the European Communities, DG Justice & Home Affairs, Hippocrates
   JA/2001/HIP/023
HEUNI,       International    Violence     Against      Women       Survey     (IVAWS),
   http://www.heuni.fi/12859.htm.
Joutsen, Matti. (1998). Introduction. In Kangaspunta, Joutsen, Ollus (ed.), Crime and
   Criminal Justice Systems in Europe and North America 1990-1994. HEUNI Publica-
   tions 32, Helsinki.
Kangaspunta Kristiina. (2003) Mapping the inhuman trade: Preliminary findings of the
   database on trafficking in human beings, Forum on Crime and Society, Vol 3, Nos
   1 and 2, December 2003, UNODC.
Kangaspunta, Kristiina. (2004-2005). Data Collection on Human Trafficking, Presentation
   at the high-level panel entitled “Remaining challenges in relation to statistics and
   indicators, building on the discussions at the high-level round table organized in the
   48th session of the Commission on the Status of Women 2004 as well as available
   data from the World’s Women: Trends and Statistics (2005) and the World Survey
36    Kristiina Kangaspunta

   on the Role of Women in Development (2005)” held during the 49th session of the
   Commission on the Status of Women, 2005, New York.
Laczko, Frank. (2002). Human Trafficking: The Need for Better Data. Migration Infor-
   mation Source. Data Insight.http ://www.migrationinformation.org
Mouzos, Jenny & Makkai, Toni. (2004). Women’s Experiences of Male Violence.
   Findings from the Australian Component of the International Violence Against Women
   Survey (IVAWS). Australian Institute of Criminology, Research and Public Policy
   Series No. 56.
Omelaniuk, Irena. (2004). Trafficking in persons: nature and logistics, Case study
   –Balkans. Presentation at the ISPAC Conference on “Trafficking: Networks and
   Logistics of Transnational Crime and International Terrorism”, Courmayeur, Italy,
   2002.
Situation Report no 1-5, Trafficking in Women, National Criminal Investigation
   Department, National Criminal Intelligence Service, Illegal Immigration Unit, RKP,
   KUT Rapport, 1998-2002, Sweden
Trafficking in Human Beings, First, 2002, Second, 2003, Third, 2005 and Fourth 2005
   Report of the National Rapporteur, NRM, Den Haag.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. (2006). Trafficking in Persons: Global
   Patterns, UNODC, 2006, Vienna, Austria.
5
Enhancing Data Collection
and Research on Trafficking in Persons
Frank Laczko




Abstract:   In 2004, IOM organized a conference in Rome to take stock of current
            research and data on trafficking in persons. This paper briefly presents some
            of the main points from the discussions which seem to be relevant when
            thinking about new priorities for research and data collection on trafficking
            in persons.



1.   Introduction
Although the origins of the trafficking debate date back to the end of
the nineteenth century (Derks, 2000), there has been a rapid rise in the
number of publications on the subject of trafficking during the last decade.
Figure 1, based on a review of titles in a bibliography on trafficking
prepared by IOM, gives a rough indication of the scale of this growth.
More than 260 titles are found in the IOM bibliography, even though it
contains only the main titles that could easily be found in English. Even
though not all of the publications present new research, there is little
doubt that research on the subject of trafficking has become increasingly
widespread, spanning historical, political, humanitarian, legal and socio-
economic dimensions. IOM alone has published more than 40 studies
on the subject since 1995. This growth in research reflects the mounting
national and international concern with human trafficking which has been
reflected in the growing number of programmes to combat trafficking.
   Studies on trafficking have been conducted in nearly every major
region of the world over the last decade, though the bulk of publications
and research can be found in Europe and Asia (Figure 2).
   One of the strengths of trafficking research is its action-oriented
approach, with studies often designed to prepare the ground for counter-
trafficking interventions. Since the mid-1990s, a great number of reports

                                                                                      37
38        Frank Laczko


 80
                                                                                      73
 70

 60                                                                                          55

 50

 40                                                                     36     36

 30
                                                                23
 20
                                                        12
                                                 8                                                  9
 10                                       4
             2     1      0        1
     0
         No date 1993   1994    1995    1996   1997   1998    1999   2000    2001   2002   2003   2004


Figure 5.1. Increase in research on trafficking.
Source: Human Trafficking bibliography, IOM, 2004.



covering individual countries and regions have been produced. These
studies have usually sought to examine the whole process of human
trafficking, investigating the causes and describing the process of
recruitment, transport and exploitation of the victims. A presentation of
existing legal and policy frameworks has regularly been part of these
national case studies. A set of recommendations for further action usually
completes such reports, most of which pursue the main objective of
informing and orienting counter-trafficking projects and strategies.




  Asia-Pacific
     35%                                                                                          Europe
                                                                                                   44%




         Middle East
            1%                 Africa                        Americas
                               13%                             7%

Figure 5.2. Regional Distribution of Studies on Trafficking.
Source: Human Trafficking bibliography, IOM, 2004.
                   5. Data Collection and Research on Trafficking in Persons   39

2.   Weaknesses of Research on Trafficking in Persons
The prevailing focus on action-oriented and applied research has meant
that studies are often conducted within a fairly short-time-frame, usually
six to twelve months, and with limited resources. There has been less
funding for long term research to investigate in more detail the causes
of trafficking and the best ways to prevent and combat it, or to make a
detailed assessment of the impacts of different interventions and policy
responses. There are relatively few studies of human trafficking based on
extensive fieldwork in both countries of origin and destination.
   Given that many trafficking cases remain undiscovered, or that
victims/survivors of trafficking are often afraid to talk about their experi-
ences, it is very difficult to obtain first-hand information. A great deal
of research on trafficking is therefore based on relatively small samples
of survivors, usually identified by law enforcement agencies or persons
assisted by NGOs or international organizations. The actual ratio of
assisted survivors to the total number of victims is unknown, which means
that studies based only on assisted cases may not be representative of the
total number of trafficked persons which may remain undiscovered.
   Most studies are also based on research conducted at one point in
time, with little longitudinal research investigating the circumstances
of individuals before, during and after trafficking, including research
to assess the extent to which survivors can achieve long-term self-
sufficiency. To really understand the long-term impact of trafficking there
is a need for more investigation into the experiences of survivors and
the extent to which they are able to integrate or reintegrate into their
communities and recover both physically and mentally from their ordeal.
   There has also been a tendency in the “baseline studies” and other
trafficking research to focus on supply-side questions, such as factors that
contribute to trafficking in countries of origin and the profile of those
most at risk of being trafficked, and less on demand-side questions, such
as the factors in destination countries that contribute to the existence of,
and a market for, trafficking.
   Several commentators have pointed out that research on trafficking has
tended to focus a great deal on the trafficking of women and children for
sexual exploitation, neglecting other forms of trafficking.
   Another criticism is that there has been relatively little independent
evaluation of counter-trafficking policies and programmes to assess the
real impact and effectiveness of different interventions. Without such
research it is difficult to identify best practices and assess which countries
have been most successful in their efforts to combat trafficking.
40    Frank Laczko

   Most research on trafficking has been concerned with international
trafficking, and less with internal trafficking inside particular countries.
Internal and international trafficking tend to be studied as though they
were completely distinct and separate phenomena, and only few studies
have tried to investigate the linkages between the two. Is internal
trafficking a stepping stone to international trafficking? Does interna-
tional trafficking have a detrimental effect on those left behind, and does
this lead to more internal trafficking?
   Even if there is agreement at the international level on the legal
definition of trafficking, researchers disagree on how trafficking should
be defined and studied. A recent review of the North American literature
indicates that trafficking can be defined in quite different ways (IOM,
2005). Some researchers, for example, argue that it is not always easy to
differentiate between smuggling and trafficking, and that this has to be
kept in mind when conducting research on trafficking.
   There are many reasons why data on trafficking are so poor (Laczko
and Gramegna, 2003). Trafficking is a clandestine activity, and most cases
probably go unreported because victims are reluctant to go to the author-
ities, or are unable to do so because of intimidation and fear of reprisals.
Most law enforcement agencies give low priority to combating trafficking.
If countries have no specific trafficking laws, trafficking crimes may
be reported under other headings. In developing countries the capacity
to collect data may be very weak. Given the fairly recent acceptance
of the new international definition of trafficking, relatively few govern-
ments collect trafficking data systematically. In many countries it is still
common to mingle data relating to trafficking, smuggling and irregular
migration. Another problem is that data on crimes closely associated with
trafficking may not have been properly categorized as trafficking cases.
Here the problem is not so much a lack of data, but a failure to fully
interpret and analyze statistics which may be relevant to understanding
trafficking in persons.
   Given these factors only a very few countries are currently able to
provide official statistics on trends in trafficking over several years,
making it difficult to accurately establish the extent to which trafficking
may be increasing, as is so often suggested.
   However, over the last ten years greater efforts have been made to
estimate the scale of trafficking and to produce more and better statistics
on the phenomenon (Laczko and Gramegna, 2003). It is important to point
this out, because commentators frequently complain about the dearth of
reliable data on trafficking, without acknowledging that there have been
some positive developments in this field. Whilst it is certainly true, as
many authors argue, that current national statistics and global figures
                  5. Data Collection and Research on Trafficking in Persons   41

are often no more than ‘guesstimates’, several new initiatives have been
launched during the last decade to try to improve our understanding of
trafficking data and to generate more reliable data.
   Since 1999, IOM has been collecting data from persons assisted
under the Organization’s counter-trafficking programmes. The Counter-
Trafficking Module Database (CTM) was created to facilitate the
management of assistance and voluntary return/reintegration activities
for the victims. It also aims to increase understanding about the causes,
processes, trends and consequences of trafficking, thereby assisting IOM
in its policy and project development, research, monitoring and evaluation.
   Since the data collection first began with the assistance programmes in
the Balkans, its content is still weighted towards that region. By August
2005, the database contained data on nearly 7,000 trafficked persons,
representing some 35 nationalities (IOM, 2005). IOM has also started
to implement a pilot project to improve data collection on trafficking
in persons in ASEAN countries (Cambodia, Indonesia, Philippines and
Thailand). The purpose of this project is to assist selected ASEAN
member countries to develop an improved statistical collection system
on trafficking. The first phase of the project involves an analysis of data
collection systems in 4 countries and investigation of the extent to which
trafficking-related data are shared within and between countries.
   Another interesting initiative is the global database on trafficking
trends established under the Global Programme Against Trafficking in
Human Beings (GPAT) of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC). This database aims to systematically collect and collate open-
source information that can be compared between different countries and
regions. The sources used were research reports and statistics compiled
and published by authorities, intergovernmental organizations, NGOs,
academic institutions and the media. By June 2004, information from 500
sources had been entered, most originating from industrialized countries.
The collected data are divided into country reports, profiles (character-
istics of trafficked persons or traffickers) and trafficking routes.
   Various regional initiatives have also been taken. In the Balkans, the
Stability Pact Task Force on Trafficking in Human Beings has operated
a Regional Clearing Point (RCP) since 2002, responsible for the creation
of a regional database on human trafficking. The first annual report on
victims of trafficking in South-eastern Europe provides verified figures
on the number of victims of trafficking identified and assisted in the
seven countries and two areas (Kosovo and Montenegro) covered by the
Clearing Point, and describes assistance and protection mechanisms for
victims of trafficking. The report also outlines gaps and recognizes good
practices and measures created to trafficked persons in the region.
42    Frank Laczko

   At the national level there are also some lessons to be learned regarding
ways in which to improve data collection on trafficking in persons. A
few countries have made some advances, and we should learn from
their experiences. For example, in Europe, the German Federal Office of
Criminal Investigation and the Dutch National Rapporteur on Trafficking
in Human Beings are among the few providers of national level statistics
on trafficking. Germany, each year is able to produce a statistical report on
known cases of trafficking and has been able to track trends in trafficking.
The Netherlands, by establishing a national focal point, has been able
to map out relevant data collected by different agencies in the country,
which has served as a basis for the Dutch National Rapporteur’s reports.
However, even in Germany and the Netherlands, the data have their
limitations. The data from both countries refer primarily to cases of
trafficking in women for the purpose of prostitution and do not include
trafficking in relation to other activities.


3.   Priorities for Future Research and Data Collection
In recent years, progress has been made towards the development of a
common understanding of human trafficking and the establishment of
international legal norms regarding trafficking in persons. The amount of
research on the subject has grown significantly and it is difficult to find
regions of the world that have not been included in a trafficking study. We
also have much more data about trafficking. Global estimates have been
prepared and several initiatives have been taken, mainly by international
organizations, to collate trafficking data from a wide range of sources.
All of this represents progress, but there are also many weaknesses in
current research and data collection on trafficking.
   Much research on trafficking sets out basically to show that trafficking
is a problem and tends to be limited to mapping routes and identifying
the main countries of origin and destination.
   To move beyond the “snapshot”, short-term approach typical of much
existing research and studies that only focus on one type of exploitation,
we need longer-term research, using more comprehensive approaches, and
involving both countries of origin and countries of destination. Trafficking
crosses so many disciplinary and mandate boundaries that there is a
need for both more interdisciplinary research and research which looks
at trafficking issues from a range of different perspectives, including
migration, human rights, health, law enforcement and the like.
   There has also been a tendency to focus on studying the “victims”,
and less attention has been given to studying the traffickers, the clients
                    5. Data Collection and Research on Trafficking in Persons   43

and law enforcement agencies who may be involved in different ways
in creating the conditions under which trafficking can flourish. Nor have
there been many systematic studies of the role of actors involved in
the fight against trafficking, such as service providers, law enforcement
agencies and NGOs.
   We also need to move beyond stating that trafficking is a problem to
assessing in more detail how well we are dealing with this problem. In
short, policy approaches should become more evidence-based, drawing
on the results of relevant research and evaluations. We need to know
much more about the impact of trafficking, not only on the survivors but
also their families and communities and all those affected by it. There is
a need for donors to give much greater priority to evaluation research,
which can help to determine the effectiveness of different programmes
and policy approaches.
   If our understanding of trafficking is to improve, we also need to
find ways to generate much better data and indicators of the problem.
The existing data are most often either general estimates created on
the basis of unclear methodologies, or administrative data kept by the
various involved authorities or organizations on the victims they assist.
The latter, fragmentary datasets cannot be collated into national figures
nor compared at international level.
   Even without investing substantial new resources, much more could be
done to fully exploit the existing information and make it more widely
available (e.g. by promoting the sharing of information among agencies
working to combat trafficking both within and between states).
   We also need to develop strategies to build research and data collection
capacities, especially in developing countries, where the research base is
often weak and data almost nonexistent. Capacity could be enhanced in a
range of different ways; for example, by developing technical guidelines
on research methods that can be used in studies of trafficking and by
promoting a more active sharing of information on best research practices,
through workshops, training courses etc. In short, there is a need to
develop strategies not only to collect better data and to conduct better
research, but also to enhance capacities in this area through a range of
technical assistance measures.

References
Derks, Annuska (2000).“Combating Trafficking in South-East Asia: A Review of Policy
  and Programme Responses”, IOM Migration Research Series, No.2, Geneva.
European Commission (2004). Report of the Experts Group on Trafficking in Human
  Beings, Brussels, 22 December 2004. European Commission, Directorate-General
  Justice, Freedom and Security.
44     Frank Laczko

International Organization for Migration (1994). “Eleventh Seminar International
   Response to Trafficking in Migrants and the Safeguarding of Migrant Rights”, Geneva,
   October 1994, IOM.
International Organization for Migration (2005). International Migration Vol. 43 (1/2)
   2005 Special Issue 1/2005, Geneva, IOM.
Laczko, Frank and Gramegna, Marco (2003). “Developing Better Indicators of Human
   Trafficking”, Brown Journal of World Affairs, Summer/Fall 2003, Volume X, Issue 1.
Laczko, F. and Gozdziak, E. (2005). “Data and Research on Human Trafficking: A Global
   Survey”, IOM, Geneva.
US State Department (2004). Trafficking in Persons Report, Office to Monitor and Combat
   Trafficking in Persons, 5 June, www.state/gov/g/tiprpt/2004.
6
Measuring the Non-Measurable:
Towards the Development of Indicators
for Measuring Human Trafficking
Sonia Stefanizzi




Abstract:   This chapter does not focus so much on the empirical aspects of trafficking in
            human beings, nor does it aim at demonstrating the inadequacy of available
            statistical data or suggesting the best definition and the most efficient methods
            for measuring the phenomenon. It examines the problem from a different angle,
            by reflecting upon the instability that characterizes all knowledge based on
            empirical research and, particularly, upon the reflexivity of knowledge and
            social practices. Over the last twenty years, the phenomenon of trafficking in
            human beings, as well as that of immigration, have been controversial “objects”
            of measurement, as regards both the number and the characteristics of the
            individuals at risk and of the victims. This area of study involves a plurality of
            data at various levels, which frequently, if not always, prove fragmentary and
            difficult to compare. The following essay examines the main factors behind this
            phenomenon, factors which cannot all be easily or quickly eliminated, whether
            in theory or in practice.



1.   Introduction
The lack of homogeneity in official sources on the trafficking in humans
is so well known to everyone that governmental authorities and scholars
alike are united in their efforts to comprehend the many facets of the
phenomenon in order, more or less clearly and with as few approximations
as possible, to identify its true dimensions.
   My own approach has quite a different starting-point: it begins with
considering the unreliable character of all the empirically acquired
knowledge and, especially, the reflexivity of the knowledge and theories
(Giddens, 1990). The reflexivity process reflects the fact that social
practices are being constantly examined and adjusted in the light of
new data on those practices, so causing fundamental changes to their
characteristics.

                                                                                           45
46    Sonia Stefanizzi

   The phenomenon of people trafficking, such as the migratory
movements of humans, in the last twenty years has been a much debated
“object” of measurement, both in the numerical and structural consistency
of victims and of those at risk and in relation to the intensity and features
of movements in the case of illegal immigrations. In both these areas
of research, as amply demonstrated in many empirical studies, there has
been a mass of data at various levels, which, in most if not all cases,
have been fragmentary and difficult to reconcile inter se. This is because
of the many factors which cannot be quickly or easily eliminated from
either the theoretical or practical point of view.
   In short, we could say that the reasons for the overall lack of
homogeneity, though many, can be effectively attributed to three main
causes:


1. The first concerns the complexity of the object of the study, its multi-
   plicity of dimensions, the growing differentiation and fragmentation
   of the migratory routes, the positions of the immigrants in the society
   they reach and the intrinsic characteristics of the quantitative instru-
   ments for the collection of data together with their ability to “measure”
   and comprehend the evolutions of the phenomenon.
2. The second concerns questions of a more strictly epistemological
   nature, in other words the relationship existing between the conceptual
   instruments available to the observer and the social phenomenon under
   examination. Thus the data on a phenomenon such as people trafficking
   in view of the close relationship which extends the consideration to
   immigration in general, are, as I shall seek to demonstrate, often the
   result of the administrative practices of various national and interna-
   tional bodies, which, when dealing with particular migratory policies,
   define and limit the knowable statistical part of the phenomenon. As
   various authors have underlined (Kritz, 1987; Bonifazi, 1998) there
   exists, especially in the field of immigration, a strong link between the
   discovery of the phenomenon and the objectives of migratory policies,
   which have a central role in carrying out a selective intervention in
   the object of study (i.e. defining the elements of the migrations to be
   measured), in the definition of the conceptual categories and instru-
   ments of identification. The main systems of discovery tend to define
   the categories of persons subject to the trafficking, whether foreign
   or migrant, in relation to elements which emerge from the various
   immigration policies, only being adjusted in relation to possible
                                                 6. Measuring the Non-Measurable          47

   changes in the national political interests and needs (Kritz, 1987)1 . An
   example of the food for thought in the data and practices is provided
   by the official statistics. In general, the officially published statistics
   of governmental authorities (on foreigners, people trafficking, crime)
   are considered a useful means for the exact study of some aspects of
   modern societies. Also, the data provided by such statistics do not only
   enable the “measurement” of certain social phenomena, but are still
   an integral part of the concrete social environment from which they
   derive. If we think, for example, of the statistics on the trafficking of
   humans and on the presence of foreigners in our population, which
   are published by the various national and international organs, we
   cannot fail to see that they are composed of data from diverse sources,
   which, according to their respective functions, endeavour to quantify
   the phenomenon under examination. However, in the classification
   of the human victims of trafficking and of foreigners, the institu-
   tions are guided by criteria and procedures which respond to two
   main criteria: firstly, the operational logic of the various organisms
   and secondly the points of view and different attitudes in piecing
   together the elements of the subject being studied. As a number of
   authors maintain (Atkinson, 1978) official data are extremely useful
   for learning about the functioning of the organizations which are
   engaged in producing them and/or the procedures for defining and
   limiting the knowable statistical part of the phenomenon. So, the
   trafficking concepts, the trade, the sexual exploitation, applied to
   foreigners, visibly and clandestinely, have to be defined, classified,
   adjudicated and registered. We might say, albeit as a precaution, that
   immigration as well as the trafficking, entering as phenomena in the
   systems of classification in order to be measured, become “political
   objects” insofar as they express, on the one hand the sensitivity of the
   governmental authorities towards the phenomenon and their capacity
   to provide adequate instruments of information, and on the other they
   become an instrument for obtaining knowledge and confirmation of
   political decisions (Bonifazi, 1998).
3. The third cause results from two closely connected factors: on the
   one hand a total lack of co-ordination (especially in relation to
   the institution of a common system of classification) between the
   various bodies which, for different reasons, carry out enquiries into


1
  In this connection, international comparisons tend to be difficult, not only because of the
difference in the systems of discovery but, and especially, because of the diverse content
of the statistics: often the same nominally equivalent categories contain non-homogenous
content, differently defined and not comparable inter se.
48      Sonia Stefanizzi

     the phenomenon; on the other hand, the unpreparedness of the various
     national statistical systems for gathering the changes and complex-
     ities of today’s societies, such as the growing presence of particular
     social zones (including immigrants) and related phenomena like
     people trafficking. Paradoxically, this has produced a fragmentation
     of cognitive activity, resulting from the fact that the studies are often
     conducted for purposes which in themselves are often important, by
     various institutional and non-institutional subjects, with the widest
     possible range of interests. These research studies are not cumulative
     in terms of knowledge and tend to be based cyclically on the basis of
     fluctuations in the prevailing interests of the moment in the political
     world, culture and administration.

These considerations bring us back to the problem of comparatively
analysing the phenomenon of the trafficking of human beings, given, for
example, the complexity and diversity of the proposed definitions, which
represent not only the expression of different legislative approaches, but
also social responses and preventive actions which are heterogeneous
inter se and difficult to compare. Moreover, there is a good measure of
agreement in the scientific community for considering that sociologists,
criminologists, etc., when studying social phenomena using different
methods and techniques, do not know the “mere facts”, so that the “facts”
which come within their empirical purview are already an expression of
given perspectives or social paradigms (Kuhn, 1962). Thus they incor-
porate profound hypotheses on the nature of the social reality to which
they refer, hypotheses which differ from one cultural tradition to another
and which, inevitably, cause a drift in the significance of empirically
observed concepts in the changing situations in which such concepts are
applied, even though the terminology used may remain the same.


2.     Trafficking and Sexual Exploitation of Foreign Women
       and Minors: Some Epistemological Reflections
If we turn our attention now to the trafficking and the polysemicity in the
meanings, the considerations above on the intellectual content become
clearer.
   The concept of people trafficking in reality covers a broad variety of
situations, from illegal immigration to forced marriages, exploitation of
workers, prostitution. The commonest definition of trafficking tends to
associate it with sexual exploitation and foreign women, even if not all
the foreign women who enter prostitution have been victims of trafficking
                                               6. Measuring the Non-Measurable        49

and other forms of abuse.2 Trafficking for sexual exploitation involves
women and minors who have been subjected to the intimidation and/or
violence associated with such traffic. This is the effect of the recent
European Union declaration in one of the many initiatives to combat
trafficking in humans widespread in many European countries, and this
is not the only example. It is not surprising, therefore, that the main
research and empirical studies on the national and international planes
have focused mainly on the connexion between the traffic, immigration
and crime.
   As resulted from the innumerable studies carried out in recent years, the
terms used to identify the traffic vary according to the various countries’
legislations: some speak of the contraband in foreigners, some of trade in
human beings or smuggling of illegal immigrants, or simply of trafficking
in foreigners. To summarise by way of classification of the proposed
definitions, we find that those that are prevalent in the legislation of
European countries fall into two types:

1. the first refers to contraband in illegal foreigners as an activity deliber-
   ately intended to facilitate, so as to gain entry, the permanent residence
   and employment of foreigners in a given country in breach of that
   country’s laws and regulations;
2. the second, on the other hand, refers to the traffic in humans as an
   activity aimed mainly at facilitating and encouraging illegal entry
   and subsequently the permanent residence of an individual, minor or
   woman, in a country, involving the use of violence, threats and abuses.
   This violence is all more serious when applied to a subject in a poor
   economic situation or suffering from physical or mental infirmity or
   being pregnant.

The common element in such conceptualizations and operational defini-
tions of the traffic is, perhaps, traceable to identifying the trafficking of
humans with the particular intentions of those responsible, and so with
the type of crime committed.
   Analysis of the main (theoretical and empirical) contributions, from
the end of the 1980s to the end of the 1990s by various organs in the
national and international fields on the phenomenon of the trafficking in
humans and prostitution of foreigners, shows an interpretative bias that it

2
  The United Nations Organization, whose approach to this subject is reflected in the
UNO Convention of 1949 for the suppression of the traffic in human beings and the
exploitation of the prostitution of others, draws no distinction between coercive and
voluntary prostitution, thereby denying a presumed “right” of a woman to be a prostitute,
and thus considering prostitution always to be a form of abuse.
50    Sonia Stefanizzi

hard to eliminate and which lies in the assumption of the starting point,
or in the presumed relationship between traffic, immigration and crime.
It is an interesting exercise to attempt to re-read some of the main basic
categories of the phenomenon, such as its clandestine nature, migration,
traffic, crime, responsibility and seek to reveal other possible meanings
and connexions.
   The term “clandestine” is usually employed to define what is not legal
or openly visible. The a-typical nature of the term depends mainly on
the absence of an effective migration policy for individuals either in the
country of origin or the country of destination. Another source, which is
not of minor importance and which helps to give an essential negative
weight to the term “clandestine”, is the information (or disinformation):
when the media speak of people who daily risk drowning or actually
do drown in the Mediterranean, they use terms such as “desperate” or
“pawns of the Mafia” without describing the reasons causing such persons
to risk their lives in order so seek elsewhere a better life. When speaking
of immigration, they tend too often (guiltily or not) not to analyse criti-
cally the economic and political choices of the origin and destination
countries, the analogy between the social exclusion which threatens
40% of Europeans and the neo-slavery which also involves child-labour,
whether autochthonous (in the clandestine laboratories in Northern Italy)
or disseminated in the Maghreb, Eastern Europe or Asia (these being
the places where people work for the lowest wages in conditions worse
than those existing in Italy before the development of effective union
protection for workers).
   The equation migration = crime reflects the fact that too easily
migration becomes criminal. A person who wishes to migrate – especially
if he has a family – is obliged to turn to the organised routes that lie
in the hands of criminals. The social definition of “clandestine”, clearly
evocative of desperation but also certainly of wrongful exploitation and
criminalization, is applicable to the migrations of today. Today it is not
only the possibility of emigrating and immigrating legitimately that is
denied, but also the possibility of the émigré, once he is in the so-called
host country, to remain there legally, because of a series of circumstances
(scarcity of work and accommodation, problems in renewing residential
licences, etc.).
   Looking now at the role of States as the principal authors of the traffic
and new slavery, we come to two main interpretations:
1. The first envisages States having an active role (negotiating the condi-
   tions of emigration and immigration with the country of destination, as
   occurs in relation to South-East Asia) with predominantly economic-
   political motives. Examples of these may be seen in the financial
                                        6. Measuring the Non-Measurable   51

   remittances, demographic pressures, etc. One speaks of traffic in this
   case because the conditions of life are “decided” by the countries of
   origin and destination (e.g., the Treaties between Morocco and France
   and some of the migrations of Chinese into the countries of South-East
   Asia). Here vast numbers of people are displaced in the interests of
   economic “exchanges” with the direct intervention of States (to the
   point where they retain part of the subjects’ salaries in the form of
   “deductions at source” by the countries of origin).
2. The second is linked with the European context: the migratory
   movements currently occurring must result from globalization
   processes and, indeed, be one of their principal consequences, namely
   the progressive weakening of the exercise of sovereignty by nation
   states (for instance, the dependence of economic and political choices
   on international factors, such as stock-exchange movements and
   processes of economic displacement). One consequence of the loss
   of nation states’ sovereignty is the attempt to impose tighter and
   authoritarian controls on the movement of persons, creating the
   normative conditions which favour the operation of criminal organiza-
   tions profiting from people-trafficking. In this case, in the analysis of
   the traffic, attention should be focused on the conditions of systemic-
   context which encourage the rise and flourishing of criminal organiza-
   tions. This tendency is exemplified in the relations between America
   and Mexico, where a collaboration aimed at strengthening relations
   between the two countries (according to the principle of free economic
   exchanges) has been soured by measures against immigration (which
   can been seen in the strict frontier controls). This has brought human
   costs and the rise of a significant trafficking in humans by criminal
   organizations. In contrast to economic liberalization, controls have
   been tightened, once it has become a political problem and regardless
   of principles of liberalism and universal human rights, over migratory
   processes, or in other words the natural human right to personal
   mobility. Paradoxically, one of the main products of the process of
   globalization has been ignored and criminalised: free circulation as an
   inviolable right, with the result that if one wishes to move from one
   country to another, the “easiest” expedient is to resort to the criminal
   networks. Examples of this can been seen in the evidence from many
   young women, in particular Nigerians, collected in various qualitative
   studies, where it can quite clearly be seen that for these women their
   passport (duly issued, but acquired through the criminal organization)
   can be obtained directly from the local police who prepare and sell it.
   The most numerous groups of Nigerians arrived, for instance, in Rome
52      Sonia Stefanizzi

     with collective transit and entry permits “for pilgrimage to various
     sacred Italian sites”. The situation of Albanian prostitution seems
     somewhat different, as it is the same bodies of Albanian criminal
     groups who organise and control it. Procurement of a passport for these
     women is an Albanian racket fully hand-in-glove with the local police
     and organised Italian crime, who accept the presence of Albanian
     prostitutes in their joint interests.

The foregoing considerations incline us towards the hypothesis that
measurement of the phenomenon of the traffic is primarily an instrument
for learning and verifying the sensibility of the governmental authorities
towards the phenomenon and their capacity to establish for themselves
adequate sources of intelligence upon it. The reflexivity of the statistics
on the traffic in human beings thus seems to derive mainly from the
fact that the various systems of classification and collection of data are
not restricted to providing an empirical foundation for measuring the
reality and perception of the traffic, but become also an integral and
decisive part of the process of political decision-making. The reflexivity
consists in the fact that, on the one hand statistical information permits
the policy makers to assess whether the objectives pursued by national
policy have been achieved , while on the other hand it helps to establish
in the élite their perception (usually one of mistrust) of the role of
migrations.
   To conclude in terms of positive proposals: we consider that people
trafficking is distinguished by such a broad problematic structure that
preventive action is necessary at a number of levels. Yet such action
could be deficient if it is not orchestrated and co-ordinated centrally.
Institutional intervention should, inter alia, focus on an activity of central
co-ordination in the course of studying this phenomenon. Indeed, there
have been too many studies proceeding in parallel with a negligible
exchange of information between the various research bodies and a
significant wastage of economic resources in this area. In this case the
role of the institutions should be to promote dialogue and collaboration
between the various research bodies and the non-governmental organi-
zations engaged in the study of the traffic in humans. This must then
lead to a better exchange of information and a direction of the research
resources, which could be clearly identified by subject and territorial
coverage. In such a direction it would be useful to establish a network
with a central interchange, acting as collector and informant on all the
research initiatives in this field, as well as the creation of a data-bank
assembling, rationalizing and integrating all materials produced on the
theme.
                                             6. Measuring the Non-Measurable       53

References
Atkinson J.M.(1978). Discovering Suicide. Studies in the Social Organization of Sudden
   Death. London: MacMillan.
Bonifazi, Carlo. (1998). L’immigrazione straniera in Italia. Bologna: Il Mulino.
Giddens, Anthony. (1990). The consequences of Modernity. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Kritz, Mary M. (1987). International migration policies: conceptual problems. Interna-
   tional Migration Review, vol 21,4.
Kuhn Thomas. (1962). The structure of scientific revolution. Chicago: The University
   Press.
Moisès, Naim. (2005). Illecito. Milano: Mondadori.
7
A Criminal Network Approach
to Understanding & Measuring
Trafficking in Human Beings
Jay Albanese




Abstract:   Developing a rational and transparent method to estimate the extent of
            trafficking in human beings is fundamental to understanding the scope of
            the problem, changes in its occurrence, and its appropriate place on the
            agenda for law and policy attention. The problems of existing estimates
            of trafficking are examined, and reasons for the disjunction between these
            estimates and known cases reviewed. Three methods for understanding and
            measuring trafficking in human beings are assessed: (1) extrapolating the
            risk of trafficking from other known risks, (2) using known cases to estimate
            the universe, and (3) using a network model of human trafficking as an illicit
            enterprise which reacts to known and measurable pressures. The network
            approach focuses on understanding the criminal networks that organize to
            exploit victims, rather than on solely predicting victim counts. Examples of
            each of these methods are presented in terms of their strengths and limits,
            and a combined approach is proposed to produce the most accurate picture
            of human trafficking. It is shown that a good estimation model can be used
            to document the risk and extent of human trafficking as an illicit enterprise,
            trends in its occurrence, and the effectiveness of measures design to
            reduce it.



1.   Introduction
In Florida, migrant farm workers were smuggled from Mexico, threatened
with beatings, and housed in remote areas so they didn’t know where
they were and could not escape (Convicted 2005). In Slovakia, women
are lured abroad most frequently by job advertisements for positions as
bartenders, waitresses, cleaners and au pairs. The women come from
low-income families in regions with high unemployment rates. They are
stripped of their travel documents immediately upon their arrival at their

                                                                                       55
56     Jay Albanese

destinations abroad, and are forced into prostitution (Balogova 2006).
In Romania, press ads advertise employment abroad, and 75 percent of
known trafficking victims are sold into white slavery. Attempts are being
made to prevent the sexual exploitation of youth there by introducing a
code of conduct for hotel staff (Romania 2005).
   These desperate and often horrifying stories have become common in
all areas of the world, as imbalances in the labor market, post-conflict
situations and governments in transition, migration flows, a globalized
economy of both legal and illegal products, existing criminal networks,
and corruption combine to exploit people for profit.
   Human trafficking takes different forms, but its essence is coerced
servitude. An early international agreement was adopted in 1904 to
suppress “white slave traffic.” This was followed by other national
and international efforts to reduce the incidence of exploitation workers
and women, culminating in 2000 with the United Nations adoption of
the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, which supplemented the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (Kangaspunta 2003).
The basic elements of human trafficking are three: exploitive labor (sex,
manual labor, servitude), the harboring of victims (through recruitment,
transport, or receipt), and coercion (accomplished through deception,
force, or threats).
   Human trafficking is distinguished from alien smuggling by the
added elements of coercion and/or fraud. Alien smuggling suggests
voluntary participation by those being smuggled, but there is evidence
to suggest that the distinction between alien smuggling and human
trafficking is not significant. This is because a number of cases
have been documented where alien smuggling often becomes human
trafficking when the victim is exploited contrary to the original
agreement (Hughes 2004; 10 Charged 2005; ILO, 2003). As an IOM report
found,
It was a common scenario in all countries (The Bahamas, Barbados, Guyana, Jamaica,
The Netherlands Antilles, St. Lucia, Suriname) that women and girls were deceived, being
offered work as waitresses, cashiers, bartenders, dancers, salesclerks, or masseuses, only
to be told soon after arrival that they would have to engage in prostitution. (International
Organization for Migration 2005, p. 151).

Therefore, the voluntary nature of smuggling can be revoked at the whom
of the smuggler, who then uses the victim for his own purposes by means
of fraud, threats, or force—making a case of smuggling into a case of
human trafficking.
   The criminal network approach described in this article attempts
to account for interconnected criminal networks at the recruitment,
                                                     7. A Criminal Network Approach        57

transportation, and destination stages of human trafficking. The pressures
upon them from competitors, police, customers, and others can be
quantified to help explain both the existence and changes in human
trafficking over time.


2.    A Problem of Unknown Size
The desire to estimate the incidence of human trafficking has exceeded
our ability to deliver useful numbers. The U.S. State Department has
made worldwide estimates which have fluctuated widely from year to
year (Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons 2005).

• 2002 = 700,000+ persons trafficked across int’l borders
• 2003 = 800,000 to 900,000 persons
• 2004 = 600,000 to 800,000 persons

The State Department has also estimated trafficking into the United States.

• 2002 = 45,000 to 50,000 trafficked into the U.S.
• 2003 = 18,000 to 20,000 trafficked into the U.S.
• 2004 = 14,500 to 17,500 trafficked into the U.S.

 A CIA report made original estimate in 1999 on which the State Department
figures are based, but it was not based on any actual count, and it is not
known whether the volume is increasing or decreasing (Richard 1999). The
methodology used is said to have changed over the years, but the method is
not transparent and cannot be reproduced, so it is not useful to those looking
for more substantial evidence of trafficking flows.
   Estimates become more troubling when they are compared to counts
of actual cases. Between 1990 and 2000, for example, there were at
least 38 documented incidents of trafficking into the U.S. that involved
at least 5,500 women (Raymond and Hughes 2001). This is far less
than estimates would suggest over a 10-year period. Table 1 displays


Table 7.1. U.S. Human Trafficking Prosecutions.

U.S. Trafficking prosecutions              FY 2002              FY 2003           FY 2004

Cases filed                                  10                   13                  29
Defendants                                   41                   32                  59
Convictions                                  28                   26                  43

Source: U.S. Department of Justice 2005.
58    Jay Albanese

counts of U.S. federal prosecutions in 2002, 2003, and 2004. Although
cases filed, defendants, and convictions, have all increased, the numbers
are quite small compared to existing estimates of the true extent of the
problem.
   Efforts to generate human trafficking data from other sources have also
found comparatively low numbers. Ongoing work by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) uses open-source information (e.g.,
government statistics, NGO reports, research findings, news accounts)
from nearly 300 sources. It found 3,671 cases, a significant number, but
far less than existing estimates (Kangaspunta 2003). Another significant
effort is being undertaken by the International Organization on Migration,
which has a global database of more than 5,000 documented victims
(discovered between 2001 and mid-2005). These cases are referred to
IOM from NGOs, police, or other organizations (Omelaniuk, 2005). Other
kinds of databases based on actual cases from various regions of the world
are under development, and some hold great promise for understanding
the circumstances under which human trafficking occurs (Korvinus, van
Dijk, Koster and Smit 2005). However, these documented cases are not
necessarily representative of all cases worldwide. Furthermore, it is not
clear what accounts for the disjunction between victim estimates and
documented actual cases?
   The history of criminology is in many ways a history of accounting
for an elusive phenomenon. Crime is typically a “hidden” behavior,
so it has always been difficult to document and estimate accurately.
Victimization surveys, self-reports, and official statistics have attempted
to count crime from the perspectives of the victim, the offender, and the
police—accounts which are difficult to reconcile. Of course, victims of
human trafficking are under some form of coercion, so they often do not
come forward out of choice, fear, ignorance or intimidation. There also
exist large variations in law enforcement preparedness and willingness to
address human trafficking across jurisdictions, so police probably miss
many trafficking cases.
   Nevertheless, better data will lead to better understanding of the
problem. And better understanding will produce more enlightened
detection, enforcement, and prevention strategies.
   Precise counts of human trafficking are unlikely to emerge, but this
is not unlike the situation for illicit drugs, illegal gambling, and stolen
property in general. So why do we bother? Without good estimates of
human trafficking, however, it is not possible to answer three fundamental
questions:
• How do countries and agencies determine the level of resources to
  commit to human trafficking initiatives?
                                                7. A Criminal Network Approach          59

• How do countries assess the place of human trafficking on the public
  policy and legal agenda?
• How do we assess the impact of our prevention and intervention efforts
  without data about human trafficking trends over time?

Finding the answers to these questions is required if governments and
private citizens are to judge the comparative seriousness of the problem in
their region, how many resources to put toward it, and whether prevention
and intervention efforts are having any impact. As a result, there is no
escaping the need for accurate estimations of human trafficking.
   It is impossible to count all human trafficking, or the totality of any kind
of crime, so estimates must be used. Estimates always involve error, of
course, due to the hidden nature of all criminal activity. Reliable estimates
are based on known data (facts), rather than on secondary information
(hearsay) or speculation (guesses).
   Three methods for estimation can be envisioned:

1. Extrapolate risk of trafficking from other known risks.
2. Use known cases to estimate the universe.
3. Model trafficking networks as a criminal enterprise and measure the
   factors that affect trafficking operations and changes in them over
   time.

A discussion of these three methods will lead us to a combined approach
to more understand the true nature and extent of human trafficking.
   One estimation method looks to measure risk rather than extent. Using
this approach, the objective is to identify risk factors, measure them
against a specific population, resulting in an estimate of the population at
substantial risk of being trafficked. This method is illustrated in Figure 1.
   Risk factors might include relevant factors such as gender-related
development, corruption perceptions index, income inequality index,
unemployment rate, known migration flows, age/crime victimization


   Composite index of risk factors:      Measure, combine,
   Gender-related development,           and weight risk       Transparent Estimate
   corruption perceptions index,         factors according     of number of persons
   income inequality index,              to their importance   at risk of trafficking
   unemployment rate, known              in a specific
   migration flows, age/crime            location
   victimization risk, known organized
   crime presence, police preparedness


Figure 7.1. Estimating the Population at Risk of Being Trafficked.
60      Jay Albanese

risk, and known organized crime presence in particular areas. There is
both anecdotal and statistical evidence that suggest factors that increase
risk. For example, a report on trafficking of women and children
from Nigeria to Italy found the reasons to include “the low valuation
of women reflected in limited access to education, employment and
income earning opportunities. Other reasons are poverty, greed, peer
group influence, polygamy, large family sizes, poor moral upbringing of
children, and ignorance of the types and conditions of work in Italy”
(UNICRI 2004, p. 127).
   The data to measure many of these risk factors already exist in
regularly collected data bases. Data on other risk factors would have to be
developed from local sources. The result would be a transparent estimate
of the population at risk of being trafficked. This risk estimate could be
useful in assessing the impact of prevention and intervention effort, in
terms of observing changes in the size of the population at risk over time.
   A second way to estimate the extent of human trafficking is to use
known cases to project the size of the universe of unknown cases. This is
accomplished using periodic counts and interviews with known victims.
Known victims over time include those known to service providers,
official recoveries, and trafficking-related arrests. Interviews with victims,
police, and service providers provides valuable information regarding the
number of victims per incident, source recruitment information, routes
taken, methods of transit, and movement of victims after arrival at a
destination point. The database developed by IOM in the countries where
it operates is perhaps the best example of developing knowledge from
systematic interviews with known victims (Laczko and Gramegna 2003;
Omelaniuk 2005; von Bethlenfalvy 2005).
   Figure 2 diagrams the logic model in developing an estimation based on
known cases. The weakness of this method, of course, is that known cases
consist of non-random samples (i.e., more serious cases are often selected
for enforcement, cases occur in jurisdictions where public awareness is


                          Statistics, interviews   Measure and     Result:
 Known victims over       with victims,            adjust known    Transparent
 time in a geographic     police, service          victim          estimate
 area: those known to     providers: number of     information     of number of
 service providers,       victims per incident,    using those     victims, and
 official recoveries,     source of recruitment,   having first-   changes over time,
 trafficking-related      nature of original       hand            based on known
 arrests, smuggling       agreement and how it     information     cases and
 cases that resulted in   changed, route, method   about           extrapolated
 trafficking              of transit, movement     unreported      to estimate
                          after arrival            cases           unknown cases

Figure 7.2. Using Known Cases to Estimate the Universe.
                                            7. A Criminal Network Approach        61

highest, and cases occur more often in locations where service provider
presence is well-established). Nevertheless, adjustments can be made to
known case samples to account for differences from known cases in
other jurisdictions, based on input from service providers, researchers,
police, and others who have first-hand descriptions about the nature of
unreported cases in a particular area.
   A preliminary effort was made to estimate the gap between reported
and unreported cases of human trafficking in the United States. Eighteen
cities were selected for their large size and location near a U.S. border
(see Figure 3). The largest circulation newspapers for each city were
selected and an archival search for key terms was undertaken. The
terms were human trafficking, drug trafficking, smuggling, prostitution,
illegal immigration, alien, and refugees. A content analysis of articles
containing these terms was conducted to see if potential human trafficking
cases were being lost in other kinds of cases, such as prostitution,
smuggling, and immigration cases. Surprisingly, only 51 distinct cases
could be found during calendar year 2002 that were clear or very probable
human trafficking cases (Albanese, Donnelly, Kelegian 2004). There are
serious methodological limitations to locating human trafficking cases in
newspaper accounts, so it will be important to observe the impact of more
experience with human trafficking laws, better trained law enforcement,
and more service providers for victims to determine the actual size
and scope of the gap between reported and unreported cases of human



     SeattlE

                                                                         Boston
                                                           Buffalo
                                                                       New York
                                                 Detroit
                                                                Philadelphia
                                       Chicago
San Francisco                                                     Baltimore
                                                             Washington, DC

 Los Angeles
       San Diego
           Tucson
                                                                 Jacksonville

                                   San Antonio         St. Petersburg
                        Laredo
                                                                     Miami


Figure 7.3. Newspaper Accounts of Human Trafficking in 18 U.S. Cities.
62     Jay Albanese

trafficking. A follow-up of this study, examining news reports two years
later, is underway.
   It should be noted that the often-cited distinction between smuggling
and trafficking may be overstated (Tailby 2001). There is evidence to
show that voluntary smuggling of persons for a fee often turns into human
trafficking when the original agreement is changed without consent of the
victim. In this way, a smuggling case becomes a human trafficking case
at the point at which the agreement with the victim becomes coercive
or fraudulent. Therefore, the difference between human smuggling and
human trafficking may change, depending on the point where it is viewed
(at the beginning as a smuggling case, or in transit or at destination when
it becomes coercive human trafficking).


3.    A Network or Enterprise Approach
A third way to estimate the extent of human trafficking is through a
network or enterprise approach. From this perspective the “push” and
“pull” factors that promote and prevent human trafficking are combined
in a single model. Changes and trends in each factor over time contribute
to human trafficking. The network or enterprise approach attempts to
account for the contribution of push and pull factors in a systematic way.
   Figure 4 illustrates how the criminal enterprise of human trafficking
is organized, as another manifestation of organized crime. It is shown
that the purpose of organized crime enterprises is to survive and make a
profit (center box in the diagram). The push and pull factors that affect
organized crime operations are four: suppliers, customers, regulators, and


                                                  View trafficking as
                            Regulators
                                                  a form of
                            (law, police,
                                                  organized crime
                         other enforcement)
                                                  enterprise..


                                                      Customers
     Suppliers         Organized crime as
                                                   (type & extent of
  (source of illicit   business enterprise
                                                  demand for service
 goods or services)      Goal: survive
                                                      or product)
                         and make profit

                             Competitors
                        (other criminal groups
                         at supply, transit, or
                            customer end)

Figure 7.4. A model of organized crime criminal structure.
                                              7. A Criminal Network Approach   63

competitors. A supply of illicit “goods” is needed (potential victims at
high risk of being trafficked), and the trafficking enterprise is pressured
by regulators (the law and the police who enforce it), and by competitors
(other criminal groups in the illicit market at the recruitment, transport,
and destination stages). Finally, a stable supply of customers (demand) is
needed to justify the criminal operation (see Albanese, 2004, pp. 104-111;
Smith, 1980).
   We can use the results of prior studies to obtain an indication of how
this model of organized criminal structure is adapted to carry out human
trafficking enterprises. Traffickers have been found to have a “chain”
of operations involving small groups at 3 stages: recruiters, transporters,
and exploiters. These groups are often unrelated except for informal
arrangements to supply victims to destination markets. Several studies
have shown human smuggling and trafficking occurs via “networks”
versus more organized, enduring, traditional criminal groups (Bruckert
and Parent 2002; Commission of the European Communities, 2003;
Finckenauer 2001; Zhang and Chin 2004). Figure 5 illustrates these three
inter-connected operations required for human trafficking.
   Therefore, the model of organized crime presented in Figure 4 repeats
three times in the case of human trafficking, because separate operations
are required at the recruitment, transport, and destination stages of these
criminal enterprises. Figure 6 is a comprehensive diagram of how these
three stages are linked together, illustrating the “big picture” of human
trafficking. They will be explained separately below to detail the unique
pressures at each stage, and how they can be impacted by prevention and
intervention efforts.
   Figure 5 illustrates how the four main pressures on criminal enterprises
(suppliers, customers, regulators, competitors) are repeated at each of the
three stages of human trafficking. The only change occurs is in how these
pressures are manifested at each stage of the operation. For example,
maintaining a supply of persons to be trafficked at the recruitment stage
involves active solicitation through personal and family contacts, as well
as advertisements aimed at those at high risk for trafficking, given their
unstable employment status, national unrest, or other risk factors noted



                                                           Exploiter’s
     Recruiter’s              Transporter’s
                                                          (destination)
    Environment               environment
                                                          environment



Figure 7.5. Human Trafficking: A Three-Stage Criminal Network.
Figure 7.6. A model of human trafficking operations.
                                        7. A Criminal Network Approach   65

in Figure 1. In the same way, transport and destination criminal groups
also have supply concerns in their need to maintain control over their
victims, transport routes, and avoid detection. Figure 6 illustrates how the
nature of the pressures of supply, customers, regulators, and competition
force a criminal operation to continually work to survive and make a
profit.



4.   Recruiters, Transporters, and Exploiters Environment
It can be seen from Figure 6 that trafficking networks can be impacted
by exerting pressure on their supply, their access to customers, and
the threat of regulation leading to enforcement actions. The recruiter’s
environment can be quantified by assigning values to the current situation
and then repeating this process periodically to assess changes and the
impact of efforts to affect supply, customers, competition, and regulation.
For example, prevention efforts aimed at the supply end of recruitment
might consist of pressure on newspapers and Internet advertisers to screen
the placement of questionable ads. Without an assessment of the current
difficulty of placing such ads (by assessing the ease by which fraud-
ulent ads can be placed) it is not easy to measure the true impact of
such a prevention effort. In a similar way, a police program of surveil-
lance of suspected recruiters must be preceded by an effort to assess
objectively the current level of surveillance undertaken through existing
police operations. Similar routinized assessment of important factors of
supply, customers, regulators, and competition at each of the three stages
of human trafficking would generate base-line data against which the
impact of changes in law, enforcement tactics, public education, victim
services, and other interventions could be assessed. Table 2 summaries
this concept by demonstrating how the influences on human trafficking
networks can be quantified.
   Measures of each of the 30 variables identified in Table 2 (and others
that may be identified as important) can be developed through existing
data and information obtained through interviews with police, victim
service providers, potential victims, researchers, and others in a position
to have first hand information about human trafficking in their area.
As long as the protocols and data collection methods are standardized,
they can be repeated reliability over time to assess changes in human
trafficking enterprises in particular locations. Of course, such assessments
must be done locally, because it is quite likely that human trafficking
operates like other forms of organized crime, adapting to local conditions
Table 7.2. Quantifying the Influences on Human Trafficking Networks.

                                           Supply                         Customers                      Regulators                    Competition

Recruitment Stage               1. Difficulty of placing         1. Known connections to        1. Strength of existing legal   1. Opportunities of
                                   false/misleading ads.            transporter networks.          provisions prohibiting          legitimate employment
                                2. Level of awareness            2. Extent to which                human trafficking.              for potential victims in
                                   among high risk                  exploiters travel to        2. Extent of police                source areas.
                                   population.                      recruitment point to           surveillance of suspected    2. The existence of other
                                3. Ease of making victim            locate victims.                recruiters.                     criminal groups seeking
                                   contacts (families, clubs)                                   3. Local traditions regarding      similar victims.
                                                                                                   selling of victims or
                                                                                                   viewing it as acceptable.
Transporter stage               1. Status of connections to      1. Known connections to        1. Strength of border           1. Relative ease and profit
                                   recruiters.                      exploiter criminal groups      control.                        of human trafficking
                                2. Ease of access to easy           at destination.             2. Ease of obtaining false         versus smuggling other
                                   transit methods and           2. Extent to which                identity documents.             goods.
                                   routes.                          destination groups are      3. Level of local corruption    2. Intensity of competition
                                                                    constant or change.            that facilitates movement       from other criminal
                                                                                                   of victims.                     groups.
Exploiter (destination) stage   1. Strength of connections       1. The size of the local       1. Police knowledge of          1. Local prostitution
                                   with transporter groups.         demand for prostitutes.        local prostitution and          enterprises using
                                2. Capacity for ongoing          2. The size of the market         illegal labor activity.         non-trafficked women.
                                   intimidation of victims to       for hiring undocumented     2. Strength of regulations      2. Extent to which local
                                   maintain control.                workers.                       on businesses to control        illicit demand for
                                3. The ease with which           3. Level of awareness of          sweatshops and forced           sex/labor is served by
                                   victims can be moved             human trafficking at           labor.                          non-trafficking suppliers.
                                   after reaching destination.      destination location.       3. Enforcement effort
                                                                                                   devoted to discovering
                                                                                                   trafficked persons.
                                               7. A Criminal Network Approach        67

which always include considerations of supply, customers, regulators,
and competitors.
   The need for ongoing, objective, quantified, and transparent assessment
has been recognized by others. For example, a UNICEF study in South-
eastern Europe observed that the impact of public awareness campaigns
for human trafficking is unknown.
Awareness raising activities also continue to be mainly ad hoc information campaigns
implemented by many different organizations. Although their work is valuable, few
campaigns are developed or implemented effectively. Almost none of the awareness
raising campaigns carried out has been properly evaluated and the lessons that have been
learned have not been shared. Therefore, an assessment of the approaches, strategies,
materials, and results is needed (Limanowska 2005, p. 14).

Others have recognized the need for more quantifiable and comparable
data (Di Nicola and Cauduro 2005; Gozdziak and Collett 2005; Albanese
2004a; Transcrime 2002). A framework to identify the data to be collected
and a comprehensive model to organize it are needed, and that is what
this article is intended to do.
   Human trafficking networks can operate successfully only where there
is some kind of coordination of effort among recruiters, transporters, and
exploiters. These three interconnected networks are separated only by
their “product,” which in the case of human trafficking is individuals at
risk who are exploited. The existence of distinct recruiter, transporter,
and exploiter groups has been documented by court cases and studies
in different parts of the world. A study in Albania, for example, found
it was primarily a transit point between Romania, Ukraine, Moldova,
Serbia and Italy and Western Europe. Interviews were conducted with
371 girls/women (174 caught in Italy, 115 in Albania), and it was
found that known entrance and exit smuggling routes were used (bribery
common). Recruitment involved 35 percent willing victims, 35 percent
false promises of marriage, 25 percent job deception, and five percent
were sold or abducted. Ninety eight percent were brought across the
border without legal documentation, and two-thirds experienced sexual
or physical abuse—some developed dependency relationships due to
coercive drug use (Lesko and Avdulaj 2003). This study offers detailed
insights into how human trafficking operates in that area, and how it
might be slowed.
   A three-country study (Belgium, Italy, The Netherlands) analyzed 481
trafficking victim case files. It identified the types of promises that
recruiters made, the nationality of recruiter, transit, and exploiter groups
in comparison to the victim, and the mode of transport taken. At the desti-
nation point two-thirds of victims were forced into prostitution, contrary
to their original agreement with the traffickers, and half were battered in
68       Jay Albanese

some way. This three-country study identified 5 source, 6 transit, and 4
destination countries, pointing to the wide transnational nature of human
trafficking (Commission of the European Communities, 2003).
   Studies like these interview large numbers of people with first-
hand experience with human trafficking. They offer clear insights for
prevention and intervention, such as the methods and promises used in
recruitment, the recruiters generally paid for the travel and documents,
the trafficking network consisted of small groups (half were three or
fewer persons; 90 percent had seven or fewer participants). Additional
facts included a recruiter’s first contact with victim was within two weeks
of departure in most cases, and trafficking routes and methods were
similar to those used for other forms of illicit smuggling. Such infor-
mation has clear utility for training for police and prosecution, victim
identification, service providers and public education. Rich data like
this needs to be gathered in other locations that have not yet received
systematic attention and analysis (see Lehti and Aromaa 2002; Lehti,
2003; Antonopoulos 2004).
   So where do this leave the law-maker, policy-maker, police officer,
service provider, or researcher in trying to develop a comprehensive
picture of human trafficking that can be implemented for prevention and
intervention purposes (and whose effectiveness can be reliably deter-
mined)? The answer is to combine the three existing estimation methods
conceptually and in practice.
   Figure 7 illustrates how the three methods of estimation can be
combined. First, risk factors need to be identified, collected, and measured
in all parts of the world where trafficking is suspected to be a problem
(as in Figure 1). This is a substantial undertaking, but human trafficking
enterprises appear to have similarities and differences whose importance
can only be understood with more data from a wider range of locations.




                                                                             Using known
     Those “at                                                               cases
                    Recruiter’s                             Exploiter’s      (reported and
     risk” of                          Transporter’s
                     environ-                              (destination)     unreported) to
     being                             environment
                      ment                                 environment       estimate the
     trafficked
                                                                             universe.


                    Measuring supply, customer, regulator, competition
                    factors to assess impact on human trafficking networks


Figure 7.7. Developing a comprehensive estimate of human trafficking.
                                        7. A Criminal Network Approach   69

Periodic (annual or bi-annual) re-measurement of these risk factors can
offer an indication of whether the size of the pool of those at high risk of
human trafficking has increased or decreased over time, and which risk
factors are improving or deteriorating.
   Second, the three-part process of human trafficking operations
(recruitment, transit, and destination) can be quantified by developing
indicators for supply, customers, regulators, and competition at each
stage. A standardized method of measurement would enable reliable
assessments over time and among locations. A major contribution of
modeling human trafficking networks in this way is that it would enable
evaluation of the impacts of prevention and intervention measures at
each step of the trafficking process. The impact of changed immigration
policies, enforcement strategies, and victim service approaches could be
evaluated across time and location (see Swedish Ministry for Foreign
Affairs 2003; Guerette and Clarke 2005; International Organization for
Migration 2005; U.S. Government Accountability Office 2005).
   Third, known cases (both reported and unreported) to inform the
assessment of the recruitment, transit, and destination processes could
be assembled from multiple locations, and then used to make estimates
within a definable margin of error (based on reporting rates derived from
interviews with victims and from the size of the high risk population
covered by data- gathering and assessments in different locations around
the world).


5.   Conclusions
The solution to the estimation problem of human trafficking lies in a
dedicated effort to gather data systematically over time, using a combi-
nation of the approaches discussed here: (1) estimating the number
of people at high risk, (2) accounting for the factors that influence
recruitment, transit, and destination activities of traffickers, and (3)
using reported and unreported known cases to estimate the universe of
trafficking victimization.
   What has been lacking in research on human trafficking thus far has
been two things: a clear research approach, and data gathered system-
atically from multiple sources and regions. This paper has offered a
research approach, but what remains to be developed are the will and
resources to fund and carry out the research and analysis necessary to
better understand and measure human trafficking over time and across
locations.
70     Jay Albanese

References
Albanese, Jay, Jennifer Schrock Donnelly, and Talene Kelegian. (2004). Cases of Human
   Trafficking in the United States: A Content Analysis of a Calendar Year in 18 Cities.
   International Journal of Comparative Criminology, vol. 4, 96-111.
Albanese, Jay. (2004). Organized Crime in Our Times. 4th ed. Lexis/Nexis/Anderson.
Albanese, Jay. (2004a). Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children: Assessing What
   We Know and Its Implications for Research and Practice. International Journal of
   Comparative Criminology, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 24-47; reprinted in Transnational Crime.
   Canada: de Sitter Publications.
Antonopoulos, Georgios A. (2004). The Financial Exploitation of the Sexuality of Migrant
   Children in Greece. Crime & Justice International, vol. 20, pp. 19-22.
Balogova, Beata. (2006). Human Traffickers Preying on Slovak Women. The Slovak
   Spectator, January 14.
Bruckert, Christine and Colette Parent. (2002). Trafficking in Human Beings and
   Organized Crime: A Literature Review. Royal Canadian Mounted Police. www.rcmp-
   grc.gc.ca
Commission of the European Communities. (2003). Research Based on Case Studies of
   Victims of Trafficking in Human Beings in 3 EU Member States: Belgium, Italy, and
   The Netherlands. European Union.
“Convicted Slaver Shouldn’t Be in Business.” (2005). The News-Press. December 18.
Di Nicola Andrea and Andrea Cauduro. (2005). Review of Official Statistics on
   Trafficking in Human Beings and Their Validity in 25 EU States: From Official
   Statistics to Estimates of the Problem. Paper presented at International Conference on
   Measuring Human Trafficking: Complexities and Pitfalls. Courmayeur, Italy.
Finckenauer, James O. (2001). Russian Transnational Organized Crime and Human
   Smuggling. In D. Kyle and R. Koslowski, eds. Global Human Smuggling. Baltimore:
   Johns Hopkins University Press.
Gozdziak, Elzbieta M. and Elizabeth A. Collett. (2005). Research on Human Trafficking
   in North America: A Review of the Literature. In Data and Research on Human
   Trafficking: A Global Survey. Washington, D.C.: International Organization for
   Migration.
Guerette, Rob T. and Ronald V. Clarke. (2005). Border Enforcement, Organized Crime,
   and Deaths of Smuggled Migrants on the United States – Mexico Border. Organized
   Crime and Humanitarian Disasters. Milan: International Scientific and Professional
   Advisory Council.
Hughes, Donna M. (2004). The Role of Marriage Agencies in Sexual Exploitation and
   Trafficking of Women from the Former Soviet Union. International Review of Victi-
   mology, vol. 11, pp. 49-71.
Institute for Criminology and Social Prevention. (2004). Trafficking in Women: The Czech
   Republic Perspective. Prague: UNICRI.
International Labour Organization, (2003). Forced Labour: Time for Action. Geneva: ILO
   Programme to Combat Forced Labour.
International Organization for Migration. (2005). Exploratory Assessment of Trafficking
   in Persons in the Caribbean Region. Washington, DC: IOM.
Kangaspunta, Kristiina. (2003). Mapping the Inhuman Trade: Preliminary Findings of
   the Database on Trafficking in Human Beings. Forum on Crime and Society. Vol. 3
   (December), pp. 81-103.
Korvinus, Anna G., van Dijk, Essy, Koster, Dagmar, and Monika Smit. (2005). Trafficking
   in Human Beings: Third Report of the Dutch National Rapporteur. The Hague: Bureau
   NRM.
                                               7. A Criminal Network Approach         71

Laczko, Frank and Marco A. Gramegna. (2003). Developing Better Indicators of Human
   Trafficking. Brown Journal of World Afairs. vol. 10. (Fall), pp. 179-194.
Lehti, Martti and Kauko Aromaa. (2002). Trafficking in Human Beings, Illegal
   Immigration and Finland. Helsinki: European Institute for Crime Prevention and
   Control.
Lehti, Martti. (2003). Trafficking in Women and Children in Europe. Helsinski: European
   Institute for Crime Prevention and Control.
Lesko, Vera and Entela Avdulaj (2003). The Grls and the Trafficking. Vlora: The Hearth.
Limanowska, Barbara. (2005). Trafficking in Human Beings in South Eastern Europe
   2004. UNICEF, UNOHCHR, OSCE/ODIHR.
Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons (2005). Trafficking in Persons
   Report. Washington, D.C.: U.S. State Department. www.state.gov/g/tip/rls/tiprpt/2005.
Omelaniuk, Irena. (2005). “Trafficking in Human Beings.” United Nations Expert Group
   Meeting on International Migration and Development. July 8. UN/POP/MIG/2005/15.
Raymond, Janice and Donna Hughes. (2001). Sex Trafficking of Women in the United
   States: International and Domestic Trends. Washington, D.C.: National Institute of
   Justice. http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/187774.pdf
Richard, Amy O’Neill. (1999). International Trafficking in Women to the United States:
   A Contemporary Manifestation of Slavery and Organized Crime. Center for the Study
   of Intelligence. http://www.cia.gov/csi/monograph/women/trafficking.pdf
Romania Warns of Rising Trend in Human Trafficking. (2005). BBC Monitoring Europe,
   June 9.
Smith, Dwight C. (1980). Paragons, Pariahs, and Pirates: A Spectrum-Based Theory of
   Enterprise. Crime & Delinquency, vol. 26, pp. 358-386.
Swedish Ministry for Foreign Affairs. (2003). European Good Prcatice on Recovery,
   Return and Integration of Trafficked Persons. Stockholm: Stiftdelsen Kvinnoforum.
Tailby, Rebecca. (2001). Organised Crime and People Smuggling/Trafficking to Australia.
   No. 208 Canberra: Australian Institute of Criminology. www.aic.gov.au
10 Charged in International Human Smuggling Ring that Lured Young Honduran Women
   to U.S. for Forced Labor. (2005). State News Service, July 21.
Transcrime. (2002). A Pilot Study on Three European Union Key Immigration Points for
   Monitoring the Trafficking of Human Beings for the Purpose of Sexual Exploitation
   across the European Union. European Commission.
United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute. (2004). Trafficking of
   Nigerian Girls to Italy. Turin, Italy: UNICRI.
U.S. Department of Justice. (2005). Assessment of U.S. Government Efforts to Combat
   Trafficking in Persons in Fiscal Year 2004. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of
   Justice. http://www.usdoj.gov/ag/annualreports/tr2005/assessmentofustipactivities.pdf
U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2005). Combatting Alien Smuggling: The
   Federal Response Can be Improved. Washington, D.C.: www.gao.gov.
Von Bethlenfalvy, Peter. (2005). The Links between the Peace-Keeping and Trafficking
   for Sexual Exploitation in Bosnia-Herzegovina. Organized Crime and Humanitarian
   Disasters. Milan: International Scientific and Professional Advisory Council.
Zhang, Sheldon and Ko-lin Chin. (2004). The Characteristics of Chinese Human
   Smugglers. Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Justice. http://www.ncjrs.gov/
   pdffiles1/nij/204989.pdf
8
Review of Official Statistics
on Trafficking in Human Beings
for Sexual Exploitation and their
Validity in the 25 EU Member States
from Official Statistics to Estimates
of the Phenomenon*
Andrea Di Nicola and Andrea Cauduro




Abstract:    Trafficking in human beings for sexual exploitation is a significant issue
             in the European Union. However, notwithstanding this, data on this
             phenomenon is scarce and often unreliable in many European Union
             countries. Furthermore, estimates on the number of victims circulating across
             Europe are given credibility even though the methodology used to produce
             them is very rarely explained.
                 This article starts by reviewing the situation on data collection on
             trafficking in human beings in the 25 EU Member States, providing the
             reader with an up-to-the-minute report by dividing Member States into three
             tiers, reflecting the reliability of their data collection systems. Secondly,
             by using official statistics on victims of trafficking in human beings as a
             starting point, it aims to present possible estimates of the number of victims
             in a few selected EU Member States. As a conclusion, some proposals to
             improve data collection in order to boost the related anti-trafficking policies
             are suggested.



1.    Introduction
Data on trafficking in human beings1 for sexual exploitation is scarce and
often unreliable in many European Union countries. The main explanation
for this is the hidden nature of the population we are dealing with.


* Under the supervision of Andrea Di Nicola, this article was devised jointly by the two
authors. The authorship can be attributed as follows: Andrea Di Nicola sections 1, 3 and
4; Andrea Cauduro section 2.
1
  From now THB.


                                                                                         73
74     Andrea Di Nicola and Andrea Cauduro

However, this is also in part due to the lack of specific anti-trafficking
legislation, a lack of organisation in the data collection systems and, in
some new Member States, the lack of adequate funds for data collection
(U.S. Department of State, 2004). These factors influence the reliability
and the ease of gathering statistics on the phenomenon.2
   This article starts by aiming to review the situation on data collection
on THB for sexual exploitation in the 25 EU Member States, i.e. the
organisation and reliability of databases on this phenomenon. Then, from
official statistics on victims of THB for sexual exploitation, it aims to
present possible estimates of the number of victims of THB in a selected
number of Member States.
   This article draws upon the results of the “Study on national legis-
lation on prostitution and trafficking in women and children”, assigned
to Transcrime, Joint Research Centre on Transnational Crime of the
Università degli Studi di Trento and the Università Cattolica del Sacro
Cuore di Milano (Italy), by the European Parliament3 in February 2005.
The final report of the study was submitted to the European Parliament
in August 2005.

2.    Review of Official Statistics on Trafficking in Human
      Beings for Sexual Exploitation and their Validity
      in the 25 EU Member States

Statistics on Trafficking in Human Beings for Sexual
Exploitation: 25 Countries
A review of the current state of data collection on trafficking in human
beings for sexual exploitation in the 25 Member States of the European
Union reveals that these countries can be divided into three tiers of
reliability. The criteria used to assess reliability in each country were:

a) presence of official and/or NGO databases on trafficking in human
   beings;
b) presence of databases on trafficking in human beings containing infor-
   mation on offences and/or offenders and/or victims.

2
  On this aspect see also: Migration Information Programme (1995) pp. 32-35; Laczko
et al. (2002) p. 4; International Organisation for Migration (2001) pp. 56-59; Migration
Information Programme (1996a), pp. 24-30; Kelly and Regan (2000), pp. 36-44;
Kangaspunta (2003), pp. 81-103; International Organisation for Migration ( 2005).
3
  The Study was commissioned by Directorate-General Internal Policies, Policy
Department C, Citizens’ Rights and Constitutional Affairs, European Parliament
(Di Nicola et al., 2005).
                                                8. Review of Official Statistics   75

According to these criteria, countries can be grouped as follows:

– Tier 1. High reliability countries. These are countries which at least
  possess official databases on offences, offenders and victims;
– Tier 2. Medium reliability countries. These are states which have a)
  NGOs collecting data on victims and/or official databases with data
  only on offences/offenders; or b) only official databases on victims;
– Tier 3. Low reliability countries. These are states with no standardised
  quantitative information on trafficking in human beings for sexual
  exploitation in the country.

The following is a summary of the features of data collection on
trafficking in human beings for the purpose of sexual exploitation in the
25 Member States of the European Union according to the different tiers.
Belgium4 is a destination country for THB. There are 5 sources of data
on THB:
– The national general police database. The police services have a
  national criminal database. It contains police data which is delivered
  by the police services, for which the Minister of the Interior is respon-
  sible. This national general police database has only recently been
  established and has been structured on a modular basis, following the
  same classifications and legal qualifications as the Belgian Criminal
  Code. It contains information on all possible offences, including those
  related to THB. To facilitate the collection of data, a standardised set
  of “indicators” have been developed and were included in an annex of
  a circular issued by the Minister of Justice on April 20th , 2004 (Col.
  10/04) concerning the investigation and prosecution policies related to
  THB. The database is official, confidential and electronic;
– The annual statistics of the Public Prosecutor’s Offices. At the Public
  Prosecutor’s Offices, the files containing prosecution data are classified
  with the help of special codes and sub codes, and follow the types
  of offences defined by Belgian criminal law, so that it is possible to
  identify the various THB offences in the electronic and confidential
  data systems of each Public Prosecutor’s Office. In addition, the afore-
  mentioned circular issued by the Minister of Justice on April 20th ,
  2004 (Col. 10/04), also introduced the future possibility of labelling
  files dealing with non-specific THB offences as relating to a THB
  “context”;


4
  The information on Belgium was provided by Gert Vermeulen, Director of the Institute
for International Research on Criminal Policy (IRCP), University of Ghent, Ghent.
76       Andrea Di Nicola and Andrea Cauduro

– The annual statistics on conviction data. Conviction data relating to
  offences (including trafficking offences) is drawn up and held electron-
  ically by the Criminal Policy Service of the Ministry of Justice, and
  are based on data retrieved from the central criminal records, using
  the same codes as the Public Prosecutor’s Offices’ data systems.
  Conviction data, broken down into large categories of offences (not
  sufficiently detailed as to allow for identification of conviction data
  for trafficking offences) are available to the public. Detailed data can
  be produced on request. In the annual statistics on conviction data,
  convictions are divided into type of offence or category of offences.
  In the annual statistics on conviction data, there are no variables on
  offenders;
– Quite recently, the Centre for Equal Opportunities and Combating
  Racism which is charged with proposing, coordinating, and supporting
  Belgian policies regarding THB, established an electronic, user-friendly
  web-interface database on victims of THB. For this purpose, the Centre
  cooperates with three specialised centres for the reception and assis-
  tance of victims of human trafficking in Belgium, who furnish the data:
  Payoke (in Antwerp), Pag-Asa (in Brussels) or Surya (in Liege). This
  database contains information regarding the victims furnished by the
  three specialised centres during recent years. The database is official
  and confidential, and until now only accessible by the above-mentioned
  Centre and (with lower access rights) the three reception and assistance
  centres;
– The Centre for Information and Analysis on Smuggling of and
  Trafficking in Human Beings. This computerised information network
  was established by Ministerial Decree on May 16th , 2004, with the aim
  of producing a permanent, integrated, anonymous strategic statistical
  analysis on smuggling of and THB. As yet, given the recent estab-
  lishment of the Centre, no data collection template for the envisaged
  strategic analyses has been designed or made available to the public.

Good data collection is also found in Germany thanks to four standardised
sources of data on THB5 . These are:

– Police Crime Statistics (Polizeiliche Kriminalstatistik), which conveys
  investigative data collected by police;
– federal situation report on THB (Lagebild Menschenhandel), produced
  by the German federal bureau of investigation (Bundeskriminalamt)
  which “is based on “intake statistics”. The annual reports are calculated

5
     The information on Germany is mainly drawn by Di Nicola (2004).
                                             8. Review of Official Statistics   77

  using the number of recorded preliminary investigations conducted by
  police departments in each State for crimes pursuant to Sections 180b,
  181 StGB”;
– statistics on criminal proceedings;
– the central criminal registry containing judicial data.

In Italy there are currently three important sources of data on THB: CED,
ISTAT and the survey carried out for the Ministry of Equal Opportunities
by Transcrime and the Anti-Mafia National Division, which is currently
being updated by the Anti-Mafia National Division. The first two sources
are public databases maintained by the Interior Ministry and the National
Institute for Statistics, while the latter is a study implemented by the
Anti-Mafia National Division and Transcrime. The survey collected data
directly from Prosecutor’s Offices in Italy, providing a precise picture of
the phenomenon. The process is currently being continued through the
constant updating of the database by the Anti-Mafia National Division
(Di Nicola, 2004).
Another important source of data is the database maintained by the
Ministry for Equal Opportunities, which collects information on the
victims of THB for sexual exploitation who obtain a temporary visa for
social/judicial reasons.
   In Spain6 , there are also three main sources of data:

– the Ministerio del Interior stores investigative information relating
  to each chapter of the Criminal Code. The information contained in
  this database originates from the data collection forms compiled by
  the police forces (the Cuerpo Nacional de Policía and the Guardia
  Civil) when they become aware of a case of human trafficking, either
  because a report has been made or through their own actions. The data
  concerns cases known to the police and the persons arrested prior to
  their committal to trial;
– Cuerpo Nacional de Policía - Foreigners and Documentation Division.
  The Foreigners and Documentation Division of the National Police is
  responsible for the investigation of THB. The Division is organised
  into various investigative units, each specialised in a particular category
  of victim, i.e. women from Eastern Europe, Africa, Asia or South
  America. The Division uses the data collected during its investigations
  to compile a brief annual report on criminal offences, such as coercion
  into prostitution (Article 188 of the Criminal Code), offences against

6
   The information on Spain was provided by Andrea Gimenez-Salinas Framis, Centro
de Investigación en Criminología, University of Castilla-La Mancha, Albacete.
78       Andrea Di Nicola and Andrea Cauduro

  worker rights (which include Article 313-1 of the Criminal Code),
  offences against the rights of foreign citizens (under Article 318 bis
  of the Criminal Code), false documentation, and the falsification of
  residence permits. This data is gathered when investigations have been
  completed, and they are divided between (a) the number of rings
  identified and (b) the number of arrests made;
– Guardia Civil – EMUME Central. The EMUME Central in the
  Guardia Civil is responsible, albeit not exclusively, for the investi-
  gation of human trafficking offences. Complete quantitative or quali-
  tative analysis of the Guardia Civil data comes from research studies
  and solved cases. Moreover, since 1999, annual reports have been
  produced on request, by EUROPOL, which contains data on sex, age
  and nationality of offenders and their victims, as well as qualitative
  data on rings, their modus operandi and contacts in Spain. This data
  refers to completed investigations. Since the introduction of the Direc-
  torate General of the Police Service Guidelines 3/2000 on action against
  rings engaged in the trafficking of women and the prostitution of
  minors, systematic inspections are carried out in clubs without accusa-
  tions being necessary or suspicion that a criminal offence has been
  committed. Complete quantitative and/or qualitative analysis of the
  data available from the Guardia Civil, come from studies and solved
  cases.

In Sweden “the National Criminal Investigation Division is largely
responsible for information on trafficking in human beings” (Di Nicola,
2004).
   Furthermore, NGOs dealing with THB are financed by the State and
furnish further data. The situation in Sweden is peculiar because of the
prohibitionist legislation. Official data suggests a significant decrease in
the phenomenon; however there are no definite results, mainly because
prostitution may have been transferred to invisible places (such as private
apartments) and for this reason it is less (or no longer) investigated.
   In The Netherlands “an important source of information is a national
database from the Public Prosecution Service (PPS). The data is gathered
from the 19 District Public Prosecution Services” (Di Nicola, 2004).
Another two organisations collect information: the NGO Stichting tegen
vrouwenhandel/Foundation against trafficking in women (STV)7 that
provides assistance to the victims of THB, and the Immigration and
Naturalisation Services. Both these institutions collect reserved data.
The collection of data in The Netherlands appears well organised and

7
     STV operates and collects data under a governmental mandate.
                                                 8. Review of Official Statistics    79

accurate. Furthermore the presence of the Dutch National Rapporteur
on Trafficking in Human Beings (NRM) provides further statistics for
deeper analysis. The data collected by the NGO STV appears particu-
larly reliable because the organisation has a public mandate to provide
assistance to the victims of THB.8
   Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Austria has become a transit and
destination country for THB, especially with regard to Eastern European
women (U.S. Department of State, 2004). In the last ten years, databases
collecting data on offences, offenders and victims of THB have been
further developed; at the moment, the main source of structured data is
the Criminal Police Force’s (Federal Interior Ministry) Crime Statistics
Database (Bundeskriminalamt). Every police officer in the field is obliged
to enter data on such offences into this computerised programme. Data
held in this database is, by law, non–personal data.
   Another important source is the “red–light database” which can only
be accessed by the police. This database contains personal information for
the purposes of a specific investigation and/or analysis. Data held in this
database must be deleted when the purpose for its collection/storage has
been completed (i.e. after the operation has finished).
   There is also a database on convictions, which is maintained by the
police upon request of the Ministry of Justice. It contains the personal
data of convicted persons and the length of their sentences” (Di Nicola,
2004).
   Another important source of information in Austria is LEFÖ
(Lateinamerikanische Exilierte Frauen Österreich). This is a Non Govern-
mental Organisation9 that provides services to migrant sex workers and
offers specific aid programmes for trafficked women (Di Nicola, 2004).
   The official source of data in the Czech Republic is “a special division
of the Organised Crime Investigation Unit of the State Police [that] is
specifically trained and dedicated to trafficking crimes” (U.S. Department
of State, 2004: 133); this unit collects information on offences. The
Ministry of Justice delivers data on offenders. In addition, several NGOs,
financed by the Government and the UN, collect data on victims of THB
for sexual exploitation (U.S. Department of State, 2004, p. 134). In recent
years, the UN and several NGOs implemented a number of projects in
the country to assist victims of THB. The results of these projects and the
data collected by NGOs operating in the field appear to provide reliable
statistics (U.S. Department of State, 2004, p. 135).

8
   According to Dutch legislation, when a victim enters into contact with the Police she
is immediately reported to this NGO for assistance.
9
   Hereinafter NGO.
80    Andrea Di Nicola and Andrea Cauduro

   In France there exists a central service for the fight against THB:
OCRTEH (Office central pour la repression de la traite des êtres
humains). This institution collects data and estimates that there are 15,000
prostitutes in France. These figures are not however accepted by some
NGOs because they could undervalue the real extent of the phenomenon
(Di Nicola, 2004). More reliable data on victims is collected by Ac.Sé,
a national scheme for assisting and protecting victims of THB which is
funded by the French Ministry of Social Affairs and the Municipality
of Paris. It was set up in 2002 by the Association ALC, which acts
as the coordinator. The network is composed of structures and shelters
that provide specialised support and services to prostitutes and trafficked
persons.
   The only available data in Greece is provided by the police who collect
information on completed and attempted offences and the number of
investigations started (Di Nicola, 2004).
   In April 2001, a task force was set up by the Ministry of Public Order
to combat human trafficking. To date the main goals have been to create
a framework legislation to tackle THB, to implement measures against
this phenomenon and to collect data. The collection of data in Greece has
improved over the last few years due to the introduction of the task force
to combat THB and the implementation of recent legislation against THB
(law 3064/2002). However data at the present time seems to be scarce
and needs improvement, especially concerning the specific offence of
THB introduced in 2002.
   Lithuania is a country of origin, transit and destination for THB. Little
data on persons trafficked abroad exist.
   Data on offences and offenders on THB for sexual exploitation are
collected by the Criminal Search Division of the Police Department within
the Interior Ministry.
   Concerning domestic prostitution, some Lithuanian NGOs present in
the country have monitored the trends which have revealed that some
foreign women operate as prostitutes in the country (Kalikov, 2003-2004,
pp. 9-21).
   Poland is a country of origin, transit and destination for THB. The
country is making great efforts to combat the phenomenon; for this
purpose, Police and Judicial authorities (in particular the National Prose-
cutor Office in Warsaw) collect some data on offences and offenders
(U.S. Department of State, 2004, p. 163).
   As regards the collection of data on the victims of THB for sexual
exploitation, some NGOs are active in the field and can provide data (La
Strada Poland, 2003).
                                                 8. Review of Official Statistics   81

   In the review of the existing literature10 concerning THB for sexual
exploitation and prostitution, no information was found concerning the
situation in Cyprus, Estonia and Malta. This does not mean that reliable
data on the phenomenon does not exist in these countries, but could be
an indication that such a problem exists.
   With regard to Denmark, the only available source of data on THB
are the annual tests carried out by PRO-Centret, and the Danish Research
Centre on Social Vulnerability (Unit for Prostitution), “on the tabloid
paper Ekstra Bladet, which for many years has been the main source of
prostitution advertisements” (Di Nicola, 2004).
   Information on trafficking in women in Finland is collected by one
full-time investigator at the National Bureau of Investigation in Helsinki.
No database on the phenomenon, its victims or perpetrators exists. This
is because no offences that would fulfil the criteria for trafficking in
women (as understood by the Finnish police authorities) have come to
the attention of the police during recent years (Di Nicola, 2004).
   Hungary is mainly a country of origin and transit for THB, but there
is only a small amount of data available, collected by the Prosecutor’s
office and the Interior Ministry.11
   In Ireland the absence of specific legislation on THB affects the
collection of data, which is limited to some statistics elaborated by the
Garda Siochana (police). In Ireland, immigration and illegal immigration
are recent phenomena and for this reason there is neither specific legis-
lation nor particular interventions against THB for sexual exploitation.
The little available data suggests that the extent of the phenomenon is
limited, due to both the recent migratory fluxes and the geographical
position of Ireland, which receives “indirect” migration from other EU
countries (Di Nicola, 2004).
   Latvia is a country of origin for THB and there is little data on the
phenomenon, which is collected by the Police: “according to the Vice
Squad, some 100 women and men depart from Latvia each month to go
to various European countries to work as prostitutes. The police tend to
have only fragmentary information about what these people are actually
doing abroad. It is usually only data about and from prostitutes who have
been deported back to Latvia” (Kalikov, 2003-2004: 60).


10
    In English and French.
11
    “The Hungarian Prosecutor’s Office prosecuted 22 individuals under the trafficking
in persons law; 18 of the 22 were convicted. Of the 18 convicted, authorities sentenced
12 to prison; the others were given suspended sentences. Additionally, the Interior
Ministry in 2003 investigated 22 new trafficking cases” (U.S. Department of State
(2004), p. 147).
82    Andrea Di Nicola and Andrea Cauduro

   In Luxembourg information on criminal offences is centralised at the
Direction de l’Information, a special unit within the grand-ducal police
force, which collects data on various types of crime. There is, however,
no specific database for THB. It should also be noted that the legislation
on data protection is quite restrictive.
   The only official sources that exist regarding related criminal offences
are police data relating to prostitution, procurement/pimping, immoral
activities and abduction or trafficking aliens. The collected data simply
qualifies the criminal offence and contains basic information, to the extent
available, about the suspects and victims.
   The data is primarily statistical in nature and does not provide signif-
icant insights into the problem of human trafficking itself.
   The current absence of data collection translates into very real diffi-
culties when trying to deal with THB. Because THB is a recent and
modern criminal offence, it still seems difficult to ascertain whether a
given case is about procuring or THB. A lot of genuine THB cases will
be eventually qualified as cases of procurement (Di Nicola, 2004).
   In Portugal the Portuguese Criminal Investigation Police (CIP) has
an Integrated System of Criminal Investigation (SIIC) as its source for
collecting data. It is an official and confidential electronic database.
   The Criminal Investigation Police work under the Public Prosecutor’s
Office. During the investigation phase, there is a close relationship
between the work done by the criminal investigators and the public prose-
cutor’s activities. Because of this, the data collected in the Integrated
System of Criminal Investigation is both police and prosecution data (Di
Nicola, 2004).
   Slovakia and Slovenia are mainly countries of transit and origin for THB
and there is little data on the phenomenon, mainly due to financial and
organisational problems (U.S. Department of State, 2004: 173 and 175).
   In the United Kingdom there are only general statistics on crime with
no specific collection of information on THB (Di Nicola, 2004).
   Based upon the above review, the following table provides a summary
of the reliability of the existing quantitative data on trafficking in women
and children for sexual exploitation in the 25 EU Member States. As
table 1 shows, only 24% of the Member States are in tier 1 and have
a high reliability of quantitative data on trafficking in human beings
(Belgium, Germany, Italy, Spain, Sweden, The Netherlands), 24% are in
tier 2 and have a medium reliability (Austria, Czech Republic, France,
Greece, Lithuania, Poland), whilst the majority of Member States, 52%,
are in tier 3 with a low reliability (Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
Hungary, Ireland, Latvia, Luxembourg, Malta, Portugal, Slovak Republic,
Slovenia, United Kingdom).
                                                   8. Review of Official Statistics      83

Table 8.1. Types of data collected and reliability of the quantitative information on THB
in the 25 EU Member States.

                                      Type of databases and reliability

Countries/types                 Official         NGO           No available
of data collected               databases      databases        information    Reliability

Austria
                    offences
                                                                                Medium
                    offenders
                    victims
Belgium
                    offences
                                                                                 High
                    offenders
                                                     12
                    victims
Cyprus
                    offences
                                                                                 Low
                    offenders
                    victims
Czech Republic
                    offences
                                                                                medium
                    offenders
                    victims
Denmark
                    offences
                                                                                 Low
                    offenders
                                                                      13
                    victims
Estonia
                    offences
                                                                                 Low
                    offenders
                    victims
Finland
                    offences
                                                                                 Low
                    offenders
                    victims
France
                    offences
                                                                                medium
                    offenders
                    victims
Germany
                    offences
                                                                                 High
                    offenders
                    victims


                                                                               (Continued)


 12
    Data on victims are collected by three NGOs working in the field and coordinated by
the Centre for Equal Opportunities and the Fight against Racism.
 13
    In reality some estimates on victims are elaborated by the PRO-Centret, and the
Danish Research Centre on Social Vulnerability, however they are based on newspaper
advertisements reporting the “visible prostitution” which are unlikely to be synonymous
with THB for sexual exploitation.
84        Andrea Di Nicola and Andrea Cauduro

Table 8.1. (Continued)

                                        Type of databases and reliability

Countries/types                   Official          NGO          No available
of data collected                 databases       databases       information      Reliability

Greece
                     offences                                                        medium14
                     offenders
                     victims
Hungary
                     offences
                                                                                        Low
                     offenders
                     victims
Ireland
                     offences
                                                                                        Low
                     offenders
                     victims
Italy
                     offences
                                                                                        High
                     offenders
                     victims
Latvia
                     offences
                                                                                        low
                     offenders
                     victims
Lithuania
                     offences
                                                                                     medium
                     offenders
                     victims
Luxembourg
                     offences
                                                                                        low
                     offenders
                     victims
Malta
                     offences
                                                                                        low
                     offenders
                     victims
Poland
                     offences
                                                                                     medium
                     offenders
                     victims
Portugal
                     offences
                                                                                        low
                     offenders
                     victims



 14
    Notwithstanding the fact that Greece formally falls into the “high reliability” tier, the
researcher chose to consider its reliability as “medium”, because there is little data to date:
this is partly due to the fact that specific anti-trafficking legislation was only introduced
in 2002.
                                                 8. Review of Official Statistics   85

Slovak Republic
                        offences
                                                                            low
                        offenders
                        victims
Slovenia
                        offences
                                                                            low
                        offenders
                        victims
Spain
                        offences
                                                                             high
                        offenders
                        victims
Sweden
                        offences
                                                                             high
                        offenders
                                                     15
                        victims

The Netherlands
                        offences
                                                                             high
                        offenders
                                                     16
                        victims
United Kingdom
                        offences
                                                                             low
                        offenders
                        victims

Source: Transcrime



Pitfalls and Best Practices
The following are the main problems which could hamper effective data
collection and the exchange of information on THB for sexual exploitation
at the European Union level:

– There are many diverse authorities collecting data. Collection may be
  carried out by the Ministry of Justice, the Interior Ministry as well as the
  National Office for Statistics. In some cases, only specific authorities
  (e.g. law enforcement personnel, Public Prosecutor’s Offices) have
  access to the data. As a result, there is little centralisation of data and
  the possibility of sharing information between countries is reduced;
– The data stored in databases is not immediately comparable across
  countries because the relevant criminal offences are sometimes
  different;


15
  In Sweden there is public financing of NGOs assisting the victims of THB.
16
  In The Netherlands data on victims is collected by the NGO STV operating in the field
on a public mandate.
86    Andrea Di Nicola and Andrea Cauduro

– Statistics are not always clear and useful. Some databases combine
  data on offences connected with trafficking in human beings with data
  referring to other offences. This implies that little attention is paid to
  the issue of trafficking in human beings from a statistical point of view.
  When the same article in the Criminal Code or law covers different
  offences, it is possible that the statistics on a particular article include
  information on different phenomena. In which case the relevant data
  cannot be disaggregated;
– The criteria for the storing of data differ between countries. Data may
  be investigative or judicial. Furthermore, investigative data may refer to
  the initial phase of investigation or to the phase in which investigations
  are concluded;
– The types of data collected may differ. In some countries, data is only
  investigative and collected at the beginning of the investigation; it is not
  judicial. In other countries, data may refer to concluded investigations.
  In Italy, the survey by Transcrime and the Anti-Mafia National Division
  collects data on cases under preliminary investigation, brought to trial
  and sub judice, and, in different instances, adjudicated. Data may also
  refer to convictions. Attention should be paid to the data collection
  stage in order to ensure comparability across countries;
– Different variables are used to collect information on offences, perpe-
  trators and victims. In some cases, these variables may not be very
  useful because they are not tailored to the specific offence of trafficking
  for the purpose of sexual exploitation;
– Insufficient attention is paid to gathering information on victims.
  One of the main deficiencies in many databases is that the victims
  are ignored. The lack of information about this group is a major
  shortcoming. The number and characteristics of victims known to
  investigative and judicial authorities may be of crucial importance,
  not only to understanding trends in the phenomenon but also to
  producing reliable estimates of the total population of trafficked
  persons;
– Some countries only maintain confidential databases and occasionally
  these are the only ones available for information on trafficking in
  human beings;
– Information from NGOs is under-utilised. Extremely useful information
  may be gathered by NGOs, but their data storage systems are sometimes
  unsatisfactory. This knowledge should be preserved, and standardised
  data should be collected by NGOs and made available for research
  and policy purposes. Correspondingly, cooperation between national
  authorities and NGOs needs to be improved.
                                            8. Review of Official Statistics   87

Notwithstanding the abovementioned problems, it must also be underlined
that some countries in tier 1 owe their reliable data collection systems to
the best practices they have been developing. Amongst the most important
best practices:

– The Belgian Centre for Equal Opportunities and Combating Racism.
  Since 2004 (when it was created) it has been coordinating the infor-
  mation collected by Police forces and three NGOs actively assisting
  victims of THB. This practice is particularly significant because it
  is a successful attempt to interface “private” and “official” sources,
  standardising their criteria of collection in order to obtain comparable
  results. In addition, the high level of details gathered, conveys a good
  knowledge of the phenomenon and of its trends.
– The annual Lagebild Menschenhandel (Report on Trafficking in Human
  Beings) by the German Bundeskriminalamt (Federal Criminal Police)
  gives a reliable picture of the trends of THB in the country. In contrast
  to the Belgian experience, this study is based only on figures collected
  by Police in reported/investigated cases of THB, according to the
  definitions given by the German criminal code. The system provides
  precise data on the number of victims. This aspect could be taken
  into account by other national police forces and statistical bodies in
  order to improve the analysis of the phenomenon, above all, analyses
  concerning victims;
– The official statistics collected by the Italian Interior Ministry (CED)
  and the National Institute for statistics (ISTAT) give a detailed account
  of offences and offenders of THB. This is also due to the entry into
  force of law 228/2003 that modified the criminal code inserting the
  specific offence of THB. Beside these sources, a particularly positive
  experience was the survey carried out by Transcrime and Anti-mafia
  National Division: an important tool for garnering better (and updated)
  information on the market of trafficking. The survey started when
  there was no specific offence of THB in Italy, so in order to draw
  a reliable picture of the trends of the phenomenon, it was decided to
  use a three-step methodology: 1) individuation of the possible offences
  used to pursue traffickers by the Judicial Authority (e.g. exploitation
  of prostitution, slavery, slave trade, kidnapping, etc.); 2) after the Anti-
  Mafia National Division terminated this process, the 15 Prosecutors’
  Offices that showed signs of being more active in the fight against
  trafficking were identified; 3) Transcrime carried out some in-depth
  interviews with these prosecutors in order to highlight and share their
  counterstrategies against THB. The importance of this experience is
  double: on one side the set of offences used to define THB could
88    Andrea Di Nicola and Andrea Cauduro

  be “exported” to those countries where there is no specific offence;
  and on the other side the interviews contributed towards important
  information being disseminated among public prosecutors, making it
  possible to implement more effective tackling interventions. Finally
  it must be noted that the process is ongoing, because data collected
  during this study is now updated annually by the Anti-mafia National
  Division;
– The inspections carried out by the Spanish Guardia Civil represent a
  strong instrument in monitoring the situation of THB in the country. In
  particular the systematic inspection of nightclubs, pubs, etc. is a very
  effective way of “feeling the pulse” of the phenomenon and therefore
  enables suitable countermeasures to be employed quickly. In fact, it is
  known that traffickers quickly change their strategies to better avoid
  police interventions and so maximise their earnings.
– Since 2000, in The Netherlands, the coordination of data collection on
  THB is the responsibility of the Dutch National Rapporteur (Bureau
  NRM). This is the first example in the European Union of a centralised
  body dedicated to coordinating the different sources of information on
  the phenomenon. Similarly, the Belgian Centre for Equal Opportu-
  nities and Combating Racism provides NGOs and Police with common
  criteria for the collection of data. The resulting data is then coordinated
  and (annually) published by the Rapporteur. The Dutch system has
  been working very well since it was established in 2000 and should be
  taken into account in order to implement a similar mechanism at an
  EU level.


3.   From Official Statistics to Estimates
     of the Phenomenon
Starting from the above mentioned review, we have selected 11 Member
States which, besides possessing more reliable statistics on victims of
trafficking in human beings for sexual exploitation, a) have similar
criminal provisions on trafficking in human beings (therefore they have an
“homogeneous definition” of the problem, they use the same language);
and b) broadly speaking, are “relatively” similar as far as the level of law
enforcement against trafficking in human beings is concerned.
   These countries are: Austria, Belgium, the Czech Republic, France,
Germany, Italy, Lithuania, Poland, Spain, Sweden, and the Netherlands.
   We have selected 11 Member States in which data on THB is
more reliable in order to try and estimate the number of victims. For
this reason a common method is needed in order to have national
                                                  8. Review of Official Statistics    89

numbers that are comparable across countries. This method was already
used by Transcrime in previous studies and has proven to be feasible
and quite reliable in comparison with other possible “guesstimates”.17
Official information on the number of trafficking victims who came
into contact with NGOs or with the police/judicial authorities (victims
in judicial proceedings) provides an important source of reliable
estimates.
   Starting from these official numbers, it is necessary to calculate the
ratio between victims who contact the police/judicial authorities or NGOs
and those who do not (i.e. the hidden number of victims). If a reasonable
definition is given to this ratio, reliable estimates can be made. This
ratio can be defined using the results of victimisation surveys and/or
with the help of the national experts on trafficking. A starting point for
calculating the ratio between the number of victims recorded by this
monitoring study on trafficking and the real number of victims can be
a victimisation survey conducted on the victims of sexual offences in
the UK (Myhill and Hallen, 2002). For this type of crime only two in
every ten victims contact the authorities. The ratio between the number
of victims reported in official statistics and those who go unreported
is thus 1/5. Moving to trafficking in human beings and taking account
of a) the lack of trust in the authorities shown by the victims; b) their
illegal status in the destination country and their isolation; c) their subju-
gation to the traffickers; and d) the covert nature of the trafficking, it
is possible to argue that this ratio is much lower. It accordingly seems
likely that the ratio between the victims recorded and the real number
of victims could oscillate between 1/10 and 1/20. The formula reads as
follows:
   Annual national estimate of victims (min. and max.) = Number of
victims who contact the police or judicial authorities or NGOs per year
* 10 (min.) or 20 (max.)
   Table 2, starting from official data on victims existing in the 11
different selected Member States and then applying the abovementioned
method of calculation18 , results in an estimate number of total victims for
the eleven countries selected for the study for the period 2000-2002.


17
   Only very few of the studies conducted to estimate the victims of human trafficking
have explained the methodology used to produce their data (Migration Information
Programme, 1996b; Bruinsma and Meershoek, 1999; Kelly and Regan, 2000; Carchedi
et al., 2000; Carchedi, 2004; Brunovskis and Tyldum, 2004).
18
   Because of the fragmentariness of the available data, it was not possible to apply the
proposed method for the Czech Republic and Sweden. For these two countries previously
existing estimates are presented.
90        Andrea Di Nicola and Andrea Cauduro

Table 8.2. Estimate of the total number of victims of THB for sexual exploitation in
eleven EU countries for the period 2000-2002.

                                                estimated victims per year

                                  2000                    2001                        2002

Country                   min.           max.      min.          max.        min.           max.
Austria                   1.430     2.860       1.830      3.660             2.080          4.160
Belgium19                             (min.) 1.730 – (max) 3.460
Czech Republic20                350                    360                            370
France                   3.260      6.520       3.560      7.120             5.740          11.480
Germany                  9.260      18.520      9.870      19.740            11.080         22.160
Italy21                  17.550     35.500      18.360     36.720            17.970         35.940
Lithuania                  160      320         100        200               120            240
Poland                    1.720     3.440       930        1.860             1.670          3.340
Spain                     4.600     9.200       6.010      12.020            7.500          15.000
Sweden22                   200      500         200        500               200            500
The Netherlands          3.410      6.820       2.840      5.680             3.430          6.860
Total23                  41.940     84.030      44.060     87.860            50.160         100.050

Source: Transcrime on national data


   In order to make these estimates comparable across countries, we also
present an annual national index of victims. This index is the rate between
the annual national estimate of the number of victims and the number of
males residing in the country aged over 15 in the year under consideration
(i.e. the number of potential clients for these victims) times 100.000. The
formula reads as follows:
   Annual national index of victims = Annual national estimate of victims /
number of males resident in the country aged over 15 in the year
considered * 100.000
   From the annual national index of victims a general index of victims
was calculated. This index is the sum average of the annual national
indexes of victims for 2000, 2001 and 2002. Figure 1, therefore, synthe-
sises the estimate of victims per 100.000 male inhabitants for the eleven
countries selected for the study for the period 2000-2002.




19
    For Belgium the calculation method was applied to aggregated data referring to the
period 1999-2001.
 20
     The reported estimate was elaborated by the Czech NGO Rozkos bez rizika
 21
    This data refers to the period March 2000 – March 2003.
 22
    The reported estimate was elaborated by the Swedish National Criminal Investigation
Police (SNCIP).
 23
    It is not possible to add data on Belgium year by year because, unlike the others, they
are aggregated for the period 1999-2001.
                                               8. Review of Official Statistics   91




Figure 8.1. Estimate of the number of victims per 100.000 males over 15 years in the
eleven countries selected for the study.
Source: Transcrime on national data




4.   Conclusions
At the end of this contribution some conclusions can be drawn on how
to improve data collection and estimates on THB for sexual exploitation
at the EU level.
   In the last few years, important efforts have been made by many States
regarding the introduction of specific offences of THB according to the
definition of the UN Palermo Convention of 2000. Notwithstanding that,
data on THB and in particular on victims are still scarce and often
unreliable. For this reason it is fundamentally important to improve the
knowledge of the phenomenon in order to put into practice efficient
tackling strategies.
   First of all actions should be taken by the Member States to improve
data gathering and data collection procedures on the trafficking of women
and children for sexual exploitation, with special focus on victims, and
particularly, on child victims too often neglected in the statistics, when
they should constitute a separate category. Particular attention should be
92    Andrea Di Nicola and Andrea Cauduro

paid to the development of guidelines for data collection and storage that
will enable a homogenous and sound cross-country comparability.
   Trafficking in human beings is, by nature, a transnational crime, but
one of the main shortcomings in the fight against this phenomenon is
the lack of comparability of information between States. For this reason
action should be taken by the Member States and the EU institutions to
fund studies to develop empirical and comprehensive methodologies and
tools to collect and collate information on prostitution and trafficking
for sexual exploitation, taking into account the hidden nature of the
phenomena and all the intervening and cross-cutting factors.
   For the same reason, actions should be taken by the Member States to
establish a national collection mechanism, that could be e.g. a National
independent Rapporteur or other similar body, as recommended by
the Experts Group on Trafficking in Human Beings of the European
Commission, that involves all main players (law enforcement agencies,
the judiciary, the social services and NGOs, etc.) that collect data on the
phenomenon herein considered.
   Action should be taken by the European institutions to set up a
collection mechanism at the EU level so as to provide updated information
on the development of the phenomena of prostitution and trafficking for
the purpose of exploitation in the sex industry within the 25 Member
States and, therefore, develop appropriate measures and policies to
address the identified needs of the persons concerned.
   Both National and European collection mechanisms should be managed
by bureaus with an independent status and a clear mandate with no opera-
tional or political functions. Such bureaus should periodically report and
propose recommendations, based on the analysis of the data collected, to
their Government, Parliament, or in the case of the European mechanism,
to the European Parliament.
   Finally, actions should be taken to improve the collaboration with
service providers and NGOs that offer a wide set of services to prostitutes,
trafficked persons and migrants. NGOs and service providers are often
in fact the holders of useful and detailed hard data that could greatly
contribute to the national and/or European collection mechanisms. It
would be of utmost importance to co-design with such key-actors a
common collection spreadsheet to gather the relative data.
   Action should also be taken to collect data in a comparable way,
in different Member States on other variables than can be studied as
important causal factors of the extent and the modalities of trafficking
other than the model on prostitution, such as: the nature and diffusion
of the demand for sex services; the level of anti-trafficking control
measures; the level of closure/openness of migratory regulations; the
                                                     8. Review of Official Statistics      93

enlargement of the European Union; the level of welfare in the country;
the level of feminisation of poverty; the level of competence and spread
of organised criminal groups; the level of corruption in various sectors
(law enforcement, judicial, political, etc).
   But why improve the collection of data on THB for sexual exploitation
at the EU level? What can better data be used for? Are we sure that
investing resources to achieve statistics on offences, perpetrators and
victims of THB comparable among Member States is a cost-effective
activity? What is sure is that improving and harmonising data collection
on THB and achieving more trustworthy estimates on victims would
result in: a) good objective information on which better knowledge-based
policies could be built; b) indicators able to evaluate the effectiveness of
policies against THB and policies of assistance to victims; c) a clearer
map of the phenomenon in order to orient the law enforcement action at
the national and supranational levels.

References
Bruinsma, G.J.N. and Meershoek, G. (1999). Organised Crime and Trafficking in Women
   from Eastern Europe in The Netherlands. In: Williams (Ed), Illegal Immigration and
   Commercial Sex: The New Slave Trade. London: Frank Cass.
Brunovskis, A. and Tyldum, G. (2004). Crossing Borders. An Empirical Study of Transna-
   tional Prostitution and Trafficking in Human Beings. Oslo: Fafo report 426.
Carchedi, F., Piccolini, A., Mottura, G. and Campani, G. (Eds) (2000). I colori della
   notte. Migrazioni, sfruttamento sessuale, esperienze di intervento sociale [The Colours
   of the Night. Migration, Sexual Exploitation and Experiences of Social Intervention].
   Milan: Franco Angeli.
Carchedi, F. (Ed) (2004). Piccoli schiavi senza frontiere. Il traffico dei minori stranieri in
   Italia [Child Trafficking: Young Slaves without Borders]. Rome: Ediesse.
Di Nicola, A., Orfano, I., Cauduro, A., Conci, N. (2005). Study on national legislation on
   prostitution and the trafficking in women and children. Brussels: European Parliament.
Di Nicola, A. (Ed) (2004). MON-EU-TRAF II – A Study for Monitoring Trafficking in
   Human Beings in the European Union. Trento: Transcrime Report no. 10, Transcrime.
International Organisation for Migration (2001). Victims of Trafficking in the Balkans.
   Geneva: International Organisation for Migration.
International Organisation for Migration (2005). Data and Research on Human
   Trafficking: a Global Survey. Geneva: International Organisation for Migration.
Kalikov, J. (2003-2004). Prostitution in Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. Budapest: Central
   European University – Center for Policy Studies/Open Society Institute.
Kangaspunta, K. (2003), Mapping the Inhuman Trade: Preliminary Findings of the
   Database on Trafficking in Human Beings. In: Forum on Crime and Society, 3(1-2),
   81-103.
Kelly, L. and Regan, L. (2000). Stopping Traffic: Exploring the Extent of, and Responses
   to, Trafficking in Women for Sexual Exploitation in the UK. London: Police Research
   Series, Paper 125, Home Office.
La Strada Poland (2003). Interim Report of La Strada Poland – July - December 2003.
   Warsaw: La Strada Poland.
94     Andrea Di Nicola and Andrea Cauduro

Laczko, F., von Koppenfels, A.K., Barthel, J. (2002). Trafficking in Women from Central
  and Eastern Europe: A Review of Statistical Data, paper presented at the European
  Conference on Preventing and Combating Trafficking in Human Beings: Global
  Challenge for the 21st Century, Brussels, Belgium, 18-20 September 2002.
Migration Information Programme (1995). Trafficking and Prostitution: the Growing
  Exploitation of Migrant Women from Central and Eastern Europe. Geneva: Interna-
  tional Migration Programme.
Migration Information Programme (1996a). Trafficking in Women to Austria for Sexual
  Exploitation. Geneva: International Organisation for Migration.
Migration Information Programme (1996b). Trafficking in Women to Italy for Sexual
  Exploitation. Geneva: International Organisation for Migration.
Myhill, A. and Hallen, J. (2002). Rape and Sexual Assault of Women: the Extent and
  Nature of the Problem. Findings from the British Crime Survey. London: Home Office
  Research Study no. 237, Home Office.
U.S. Department of State (2004). Trafficking in Persons Report – June 2004. Washington
  D.C.: U.S. Department of State, Office of the Under Secretary for Global Affairs.
9
Qualitative Research
in Trafficking – A Particular Case
Grigoris Lazos




Abstract:   This chapter contains a short presentation of the methodological decisions
            (and their reorientations) during the many-year research on trafficking in
            women and youths in Greece. It focuses on the qualitative aspects of research
            on this topic. The following issues are addressed: the methods of accumu-
            lating material; the verification of findings; the dilemma of generalization or
            ‘true stories from the field’; the qualitative-quantitative research relations;
            the shocking passages from the ‘unknown’ to the ‘missing’; the distinction
            between researcher and research subject.



1.   Introduction
The research project on trafficking on which I present certain comments
regarding methodological decisions and their practical applications,
started more than fifteen years ago. A paper on the methods was published
in early 1998, while studies on the research findings were published
in various forms from 1996 to 2004.1 However, the research was to
continue – and in fact, it has not yet ended. After so many years spent
in actual research, to write an article on methods gives a strange feeling,
since the subject and the methods (and the researcher) have changed in
many respects. Among the factors that affected the methods, perhaps
the most important was that the phenomenon went through four phases:
practice (1990-95), practice and social issue (1996-2000), practice, social
issue and political issue (2001-2002), practice, social issue, state issue
and civil society issue (2003 to the present). Each new phase brought
about changes in trafficking as a practice, which has always constituted

1
  The Problem of Qualitative Research in the Social Sciences (1998), Prostitution and
Trafficking in Modern Greece (2001).


                                                                                        95
96    Grigoris Lazos

my major research focus. For example, the adoption of law 3064/2002
against trafficking or the police offensives from September 2001 to April
2003 (under the guidance of the Group against Trafficking created within
the Ministry of Public Order) resulted in some interesting alterations
involving all stages and most forms of trafficking in Greece.


2.   The Research Topic and Methods
The initial focus of research on trafficking in the late 1990s was on the
qualitative characteristics of the phenomenon, the typical relations and
personal biographies of all those engaged in it, from women and youths
to the traffickers themselves to the clientele. Trafficking was in many
respects a novel form of social relation and did not fit in the theoretical,
historical and empirical standards of prostitution within the sovereign
national state framework. Erzberger and Prein (1997, p. 144), Denzin
and Lincoln (1994, p. 4) and Filias (1998, p. 18) seem to agree that
qualitatively oriented research is necessary to grasp new or unknown
sides of social reality for which the researcher has no previous theoretical
or empirical knowledge to turn to. In fact, it took me several months
and a lot of ‘tutoring’ from experienced legal Greek prostitutes to start
comprehending the differences between prostitution and trafficking.
   Trafficking is not an isolated social, economic, political and cultural
phenomenon. It is part of the broader complex of the illegal market in
Greece (and not only), the market in which all sorts of illegal commodities
– drugs, guns, sexual services (and, lately, human organs) etc. – are for
sale to meet needs and desires of all sorts, those available through money
and/or power. All those specialized markets are intimately connected.
And they enjoy the – crucial for their survival and reproduction – contact
with legality, the kind of contact known as corruption (Lazos, 2004). The
corrupt elements contribute to and participate in the illegal economic and
psychological exploitation of the trafficked women and youths.
   Trafficking is a dangerous topic for research. Although it appears
interesting, it is not the proper pastime topic for an academic. It takes
place in organized crime territory, the research takes place in organized
crime grounds. These are ‘closed’ or ‘guarded’ social spaces with detailed
internal codes that have to be respected with the utmost care. No one
representing a risk for the members of these social (partly criminal)
networks is ever accepted inside them. Moreover, even if accepted, if
he/she is suspected of spreading names and facts that may lead to arrest,
he/she runs great risks. What proved important when I, as a researcher,
strove to stabilize my presence in the field was the fact that most of
                                           9. Qualitative Research in Trafficking     97

the traffickers did not feel like organized criminals. They knew that they
could be prosecuted for organized crime activities, but they attributed it
to ignorance of ‘what really happens’ from the part of the law (Lazos,
2005). Through various neutralization defences (noted by Matza, 1964,
and Matza and Sykes, 1961), they did not feel that they were acting in
ways that were distinguishable from those of standard businessmen. As
far as the violence they practiced is concerned, they felt that they had to
substitute the law in the absence of provisions regulating social relations
within this particular social territory. Yet, it must be noted that the
trafficking market operatives did share the same general values with most
of the general population by focusing on money and success (Maganas
and Lazos, 1999). So, if the researcher has the time and opportunity to
learn the local codes and act without violating them (and to do that he/she
has to run the risk of violating the general codes and/or the law), there
is a lot of ‘tacit knowledge’ (Altheide and Johnson, 1994, pp. 492-93)
that can be used as a basis. The organized crime trafficking culture is not
qualitatively different from the rest of conventional cultures constituting
the overall societal cultural matrix. After some time, the researcher may
accumulate a capital of acceptance (which includes the ‘luxury’ of being
critical of some of the local practices).
   Field research on trafficking, as perhaps most field research, needs
time, a lot of time. White’s, Vidich’s and Humphrey’s field research
demanded one fourth, one fifth and one sixth of their total scientific
activity (Whyte, 1981, Vidich and Lyman, 19940). And this reveals
the tragic moment of research, ‘Rasmussen’s nightmare’: investing the
necessary time in research equals professional suicide (Rasmussen,
1989).2
   Since this research on trafficking constituted a long-term effort, there
emerged changes that had the time to backfire in the initial research
models, altering priorities, introducing new questions, valuing new hints,
refining techniques and understandings. The methods were constantly
reformed, altered and reemphasized, not only due to the proposal of
new research ideas in international bibliography but, also, due to the
fact that the subject of interest, trafficking in Greece, was changing in
complicated ways that demanded extensive and intense thinking time
in order to control an infinity of moments and structures that were
mutually incompatible. This is a problem that, to my knowledge, is not


2
  Let me note that all of those young students (men and women) that assisted me in the
research effort from 1995 to 2000 continued their studies on postgraduate levels. Yet,
although experienced on trafficking with thousands of research hours, all of them decided
to present their doctorates on different subjects.
98    Grigoris Lazos

appropriately confronted in international bibliography: qualitative field
research is approached as a short-term fixed project. Yet, in long-term
projects during periods of broad social change there emerge important
changes – discontinuities – in the subject, the society, the researcher and
the methods. Among so many other changes introduced in the research
let me note the reconceptualization of the ‘field’: to the ‘physical space’
as developed by Park, Burgess and McKenzie (1967, pp. 1-46) was
‘added’ Geertz’s conceptualization of focusing on ‘local knowledge’
(Geertz, 1983).Local knowledge and rumour as a way of passing news
and opinions are of crucial importance in deviant, ‘grey zone’ social
environments that have no general media channels (he/she who spreads
‘lies’ is discredited). So, gradually, the research effort turned to Denzin’s
postmodern research perspective (1989a), emphasizing the difficulties of
field research generalization (and notwithstanding his simplistic historical
conceptions about the Fourth Epoch of the social world). Nevertheless,
for a long time, the personal hour-to-day reality of the trafficking
victim and the month-to-year reality of the trafficking network did not
match in the overall research reasoning. Gradually, after witnessing
and registering the passage (or processing) of thousands of women and
youths through trafficking, through the nexus of client and trafficker,
there emerged a hint of wisdom – or futility: I knew beforehand
what was awaiting the new arrivals. I was older than my research
subject. The unspoken but prevalent in social research assumption
that the researcher remains constant, changeless and unaffected by
the general social environment throughout the research needs to be
revisited and rethought, even if it adds rather than detracts to the
complexities of research. And, of course, the researcher is changed
by the growing knowledge of his/her subject. Researcher and research
topic constitute moments of the same historical framework (Olmann,
1993, p. 45).
   The subject for research and reflection on trafficking, of which I
present certain broad characteristics, was not limited to developments
in Greece. On the one hand, the material collected was compared –
or, more accurately, connected – with information and fruitful ideas
advanced from colleagues in various countries, international organiza-
tions and NGOs dealing with trafficking processes in eastern European
and Balkan countries. My participation in the Group against Trafficking
gave me the opportunity to study in detail the materials at the disposal of
the Greek Police (whether collected and organized or not) and to compare
them with the broader in perspective research findings. The verification
of findings followed the ideas of Miles and Huberman (1984), post-
positivists or transcendental realists, and Bashkar (1989) who insist that
                                     9. Qualitative Research in Trafficking   99

social facts (if we agree on what is a social fact) are presentable with
accuracy, the qualitative research effort is repeatable and the findings are
not unique. The accumulating material of the research effort was (partly)
saturated, emphasized and evaluated on the basis of Denzin’s postmodern
criteria of triangulation (1989b) which proved less sensitive but more
economical than Richardson’s criteria of crystallization which perhaps are
more demanding than the research situation in trafficking permits (1994).
By touching the very interesting issue of the time, energy (and money
and power, I may add) economics of the research, two more important
influences have to be noted. The first is Glaser and Strauss’ concept of
saturation of available material, i.e that it is better to avoid collecting
material on issues regarding which the material available forms an appro-
priate basis for the intended generalizations. But, referring to saturation,
I must note that the research object of trafficking has internal dynamics
that hardly permit the researcher to exercise this form of economics –
or, at least, this was the case in my research. Second, the computer was
extensively used to orient and organize material through the application
of Relational Database Management Systems such as the NUDIST and
the Ethnograph. This technology proved partly fruitful and (or but?) did
affect the research emphases on several occasions.
   Turning to the methods for accumulating material, trafficking cannot
be studied at the level of ‘street research’ through questionnaires (as
applied in Maganas-Lazos with a specific focus on values), or, in fact,
by any single method. On the contrary, it necessitates the application of
all types of methods that are available in the social sciences – including
social geography and urban centre planning dynamics. The research effort
was based on a central presupposition that proved effective in disci-
plining the great numbers of available research methods and method
variations (as well as the vastness of the collected material). This was
the emphasis on history – societal history and the micro-history of the
individuals involved in the subject (or biography). Or, to put it succinctly:
if no history, then no theory, no method, and then no facts. According
to Barthes (1972, p. 41), research constantly tried to avoid ‘the mirac-
ulous evaporation of history from events’. Facts perceived as ‘dead-end’
were put aside to the broad category of ‘events’ (schematically, events
of no perceived importance) in Nisbet‘s terminology (1969, pp. 272-82),
and the emphasis was turned on chains of facts in chains of individuals.
The central question was about what happens next. If there was no next
there was no fact – probably an arbitrary and pre-scientific decision,
but relieving from the pressure of infinite detail. Within this general
framework, the applied ‘strategy’ (a rather heavy term, indicating full
planning and control) closely resembles – or even, is homologous to – the
100    Grigoris Lazos

strategy of Cohen during his research on Folk Devils and Moral Panics
(1972): (structured and intimacy-inclined) interview, observation and
(peripheral and selective) participant observation.
   As far as the interview is concerned, the form systematically applied
was the structured interview. Instead of the ‘free-floating’ interview, the
structured interview was carried as if an invisible questionnaire had to be
completed. Moreover, the emphasis was turned on concrete facts, situa-
tions as well as concepts with societal equivalents: amount of money,
number of hirings, type of services, client types and postures, use of
prophylactics, food eaten, hours of starting and ending the offering of
sexual services, types of sexual services offered, health problems, teeth
condition (far more easily established than, say, the liver condition), costs
for dressing, bathing habits, free time passing etc. This is a practical idea
that I owe to Amin’s definition of culture not as the unfathomable domain
of ideas but as the everyday modes of organization of use values (1980).
The structured interview (for the initial idea, see Becker et al., 1961) was
addressed to anyone judged to carry important information: trafficking
victims, legal prostitutes (usually, pimp victims and/or addiction-to-
illegal-substances victims), traffickers, pimps, pushers, policemen and
many other ‘locals’. More than 8,000 interviews were collected, with
2,158 of them being kept (protected) as ‘hard fact’ for a future analytical
focus or for the future researcher.
   As is well known, Oakley (1981), thinks that interviewing women
constitutes a contradiction in terms. Interviewing is seen as a sexist
method – if not a form of penetration, I may add. In a parallel line, Fontana
and Frey (1994), support that learning relevant techniques attaches an
unethical-technical character to the interview and predisposes in seeing
the researched as a ‘head’ that has to give ‘data’. Fine (in Fontana and
Frey) feels that the interview is a pseudo-discussion not inclusive of
any limits of using the other. Up to a significant extent, I tend to share
the specific conceptions – and, perhaps, the structured interview is even
more sexist and unethical-technical. On the other hand, I think that under
certain conditions and in social environments such as trafficking, there
are not many research alternatives available. And I remain convinced
that someone, even a man in the absence of a woman (as trafficking in
Greece did not attract a feminist interest), had to collect moments of the
fragmented lives of these women – even by interviewing.
   Intimate interview, a form of ‘free-floating’ communication and fear
sharing, was reserved to those that could be addressed in non-stereotypical
and non-ritualistic manners, and in relatively equal terms – coming nearer
to Oakley’s‘ axiom ‘no intimacy without reciprocity’ (p. 49, for a criticism
see Wise, 1987). Intimate interviews had limited (and indirect) research
                                     9. Qualitative Research in Trafficking   101

value – apart from personal catharsis due to the fact that after a few
hours I would be home. (On the other, gradually, the intimate interviews
affected me and proved of decisive importance since the second volume
of my central publication focused on the client and was oriented to (and
tried to organize) these women’s thoughts, feelings, and points of fear,
hate, suppressed rage.)
   Observation, although even more questionable in Oakley’s terms,
proved irreplaceable as a means of generalizing the knowledge advanced
in interviews. For, we should remember that, with or without an accepted
integrity capital in the local cultures and regardless of whether one avoids
or takes risks, research in trafficking localities is dangerous. With a
degree of simplification, the selection of appropriate positions in a locality
enabled the estimation of various broad flows such as the number of men,
the time elapsed and, in addition, preferences, attitudes, habits, routines,
rituals etc. It is through observation at the places of contact and/or service,
that the heart of the trafficking Inferno, the production and exchange of
value emerges in its entirety.


3.   Generalization or ‘Tales from the Field’
Touching the scientifically important issue of generalization of the
findings, the research, study and understanding of trafficking leaves two
polar choices or orientations open: generalization or ‘true stories from
the field’ (Van Maanen, 1988). Also, Nelson et al. (1992), correctly,
according to my opinion, note that the particularities and the concreteness
of the research subject set important limits to generalization. On a
different level, the issue raised by those researchers leads to another
issue raised by Sayer (1984, 1997): the researcher in the field has to
choose between absolute subjectivity (nearing Van Maanen’s ‘tales’) to
zero subjectivity (nearing Miles and Huberman’s repeatability presen-
tation of findings in generalized or even statistical forms, a conception
which is definitely not equivalent in any way with conceptions such as
those denying any subjective variation, such as those presented in Shea
and Guzzo, 1987).
   The overall research methods used in the trafficking research I refer
to assisted generalization, even generalization through statistics. This
selection led to an emphasis on quantity as a form of immediate gener-
alization, although it was the initial qualitative choices that defined the
issues to be generalized. This passage from quality to quantity was not the
product of a single and instant decision, and in fact it took months before
it was elevated to one of the central determinants of the research project.
102    Grigoris Lazos

Of course, it was based on the previous research effort, rested on its
categories and subcategories and shared the same theoretical paradigm. In
this research, quality has, and still does, always provided the micro-units
for generalization. After the initial two years, and with findings of all
sorts piling up, the emphasis turned to quantity – how many, how much,
how long. Everything which was considered of importance and could be
counted and processed started being counted and processed. It appears
that this reorientation emerged as a response to two different pressing
issues. First, the conscious attempt to get a firm grasp of the societal,
of the meta-subjective dimensions of the phenomenon of trafficking.
The second came later, in 1996, and the emergence of trafficking as a
social issue of priority. My intention was not to become a ‘zoo keeper
of trafficking’, one more ‘zoo keeper of deviance’, in Gouldner’s classic
terms (1971). So, there were no stories about, rape, death, suffering,
exploitation, no personal histories – no ‘tales from the field’ to feed the
‘blood and sperm’ public curiosity. The focus turned primarily on the ‘zoo
dimensions’ (plus a few strokes on client subjectivity). To use Marx’s
phrase, all the potentially emotionally appealing material collected is ‘left
to mice’s rodent criticism’.
   It is not plausible to criticize this emphasis as positivist (in the bad
sense of the term). Once more, the idea came from an ardent anti-
positivist, Howard Becker, who in his ‘Problems of inference and proof in
participant observation’ (1958/1970) advanced his theory on the necessity
of utilizing a ‘semi-statistics’. Indeed, during the last decades, there
emerged an overvalued attachment of the ‘soft’ social sciences – such
as sociology, anthropology, history and criminology – to the statistically
expressed facts and figures (Beirne, 1993). It has to be emphasized that,
within the much broader framework of development of scientific ‘models
without a subject’ since the 17th century (Kuhn, 1970) the statistical
table has a major defect: it makes all those included look alike, appear
as variations of degree. As such, it is not full - or even adequate or
sufficient - knowledge (in scientific terms), but, rather, in Hegel’s words,
knowledge in suspension. To say that in 1993, in Greece there were 8,500
victims of trafficking (for sexual exploitation) might seem impressive
but has little value; perhaps it is nothing more than a useful hint to
where to where we should turn our attention. Irrespectively of C. W.
Mills‘ theory that a personal problem is a social problem (1958/1979),
it appears that we live in a society that needs numbers: many people
must suffer from something – regardless of the quality of suffering –
before anyone considers taking action in order to deal with the problem.
And this is one reason, in addition to the two previously mentioned,
that contributed towards orienting my research efforts (mainly on the
                                    9. Qualitative Research in Trafficking   103

levels of processing and presenting, although it the ways of collecting
material were also affected) to producing ‘hard statistical facts’ as well
as ethical and political considerations, which appear to have been proven
partly effective up to the present. Although my personal conviction is
that statistics are (no more than) a generalizable but formal and abstract,
contentless form of expression, the public and the political and state
authorities definitely respect this way of expression more than I do and
identify statistics with ‘science’ (Taylor et al., 1973, pp. 11-12).
   On the other hand, the emphasis on ‘pure quality’, or the rejection
of generalization in favor of the particular case, the individual feeling,
intention and situation – like the fine criminology of Pepinsky, for
example (1986) – not only fails to lead to results that may call for
action but, most importantly in methodological terms, fails to deal with
very important and very ‘real’ levels of reality. As far as trafficking is
concerned, according to my opinion, only through generalization is it
possible to reveal markets, transportations and corridors, networks, forms
and variations, space and time arrangements in trafficking – or the range
of possible futures awaiting those involved in it.
   During the research effort there were many times when the ‘unknown’
was elevated into ‘missing’. It is a different thing not to know about
African trafficked women, and to know about them and try to locate them
as concretely as possible – as well as try to comprehend the importance
of woodoo magic (at least as a mechanism of controlling them). Such
an elevation to consciousness frequently proved practically demanding
(and emotionally agonizing) for it was asking for new orientation or the
‘addition’ of a new dimension – and, of course, additional (office or
street) work. During the last years, with the reorientation of trafficking in
Greece from a(n ineffective) ‘brutal’ to a(n effective) ‘market’ mentality,
and the reorientation of societal and state confrontation to trafficking from
‘combating’ to ‘management’, these tantalizing ‘missing moments’ in
terms of theory, method and practice reappear on the surface, demanding
to be elevated into priorities. It appears that the new moments stem
first and foremost from the international character of trafficking, so the
answers can be given only partially within the locality of Greece.


4.   Conclusions
A central argument underlying the research efforts telegraphically
presented in this article is that the absolute distinction between the
researcher and his/her subject, constitutes a fundamental fallacy, a
mythology (Becker, 1967). Research knowledge, no matter how it is
104    Grigoris Lazos

processed and presented, remains primarily contextual (Braithwaite,
1993), or, there can be no full split between the researcher and the
research effort, the research effort and the research subject (Lazos, 1998,
p. 22). Such distinctions are applicable only to technocratic data collecting
and processing – but at the decisive cost of estrangement and mysti-
fication, stemming from the fact that subject choice and engagement
are not personal choices stemming from scientific curiosity but orders
advanced from a higher authority (‘political’), with the ‘scientific’ being
reduced from method to technique. In the case of this specific research
on trafficking, I did gradually start becoming interested in certain things
that happen or not in the real lives and processes under research,
sometimes wishing for an effort to succeed, some other times for it
to fail – something which affected my status as a detached observer.
Or even, sometimes, it was necessary to intervene, by spending or
investing a portion of the accumulated capital of acceptance – thus
affecting the status of detached observer as well as the research subject.
From ‘the other side’, certain individuals who were part of the subject
of research (trafficked women, members of trafficking networks, local
peripheral figures) started advancing concrete and detailed information
and interpretations of events. For example, I was never able to come
into (research-wise significant) immediate contact with Albanian girls
(during the periods that were) under trafficking network control. It was
some Greek legal and illegal prostitutes that carried the research for
me. They did it on their own initiative, supplying me with their ‘other-
side-of-the-street’ observations and experience, rumors (and evaluations
of rumors) as well as carrying out interviews with the Albanian girls.
In practical terms, they acted as members of the research team. Thus,
returning to one of my initial arguments, were these women part of the
(research) subject or part of the research (subject)? In fact, they were
both. In other cases, there were several individuals that provided me
with packages of information, for example, that 36 (for another, 37)
women from Ukraine entered Greece as a group on the first week of July
1998, and were transfered to expensive, central urban locations in Athens
and Thessaloniki, in order to counter the drain of trafficked women to
other EU countries and to the Greek islands during peak-season vacation
periods.
   Going a step further, it is felt that the principle of ‘value neutrality’ –
at least in the forms it is frequently applied as a convenient shortcut,
distorting or even turning around the early-20th century Weberian
argument – is also a convenient fallacy, throwing scientific reflection
overboard. Although it appears unnecessary that the researcher needs a
standpoint perspective to carry out research (Hawkesworh, 1989), he/she
                                          9. Qualitative Research in Trafficking       105

enters the field fully equipped with a ‘hidden ethical and political agenda’
(Punch, 1986, p. 14), with some hidden audiences and hidden purposes
in mind.

References
Altheide, D. L. and J. M. Johnson (1994).‘Criteria for assessing interpretative validity in
   qualitative research’. in Handbook of Qualitative Research, Denzin, N. K. and Y. S.
   Lincoln (ed.), Thousand Oaks, pp. 490-499
Amin, S. (1980). Class and Nation, Historically and in the Current Crisis, New York:
   Monthly Review Press.
Barthes, R. (1972). New Critical Essays, New York: Hill and Wang.
Bashkar, R. (1989). A Realist Theory of Science, Leeds: Leeds.
Becker, H. S., B. Geer, E. C. Hughes, A. L. Strauss (1961). Boys in White: Student
   Culture in Medical School, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Becker, H. S. (1967). ‘On methodology’, in Sociological Work, H. S. Becker (ed.),
   Chicago: Aldine.
Becker, H. S. (1970). ‘Problems of inference and proof in participant observation’, in
   Sociological Work, H. S. Becker (ed.), Chicago: Aldine.
Beirne, P. (1993). Inventing Criminology, New York: State University of New York.
Braithwaite, J. (1993). ‘Beyond positivism: Learning from contextual integrated
   strategies’, Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 30(4), pp. 383-99.
Cohen, S. (1972). Folk Devils and Moral Panics: The Creation of Mods and Rockers,
   New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Denzin, N. K. and Y. S. Lincoln (ed.) (1994). Handbook of Qualitative Research,
   Thousand Oaks, pp. 1-7.
Denzin, N. K. (1989). Interpretative Interactionism, Newsbury Park: Sage.
Denzin, N. K. (1989). The Research Act, Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall.
Erzberger, C. and G. Prein (1997). ‘Triangulation: Validity and empirically-based
   hypothesis construction’, Quality and Quantity, 31, pp. 141-54
Filias, V (ed.) (1998). Problems and Indications II, Athens: Sideris.
Fontana, A. and J. H. Frey (1994). ‘Interviewing: The art of science’, in Denzin and
   Lincoln, pp. 361-376
Geertz, C. (1983). Local Knowledge: Further Essays in Interpretative Anthropology, New
   York: Basic.
Glaser, B. G. and A. L. Strauss (1967). The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies
   for Qualitative Research, Chicago: Aldine.
Gouldner, A. W. (1971). The Coming Crisis of Western Sociology, London: Heinermann
   Educational.
Hawkesworth, M. E. (1989). ‘ Knowers, knowing, known: Feminist theory and claims of
   truth’, Signs, 14, pp. 533-557.
Kuhn, T. S. (1970). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, Chicago: University of
   Chicago Press.
Lazos, Gr. (2004). Corruption and Anticorruption, Athens, Nomiki Vivliothiki
Lazos, Gr. (2005). Notes on Organized Crime, Athens: Panteion.
Lazos, Gr. (1998).The Problem of Qualitative Research in the Social Sciences. Theory
   and Practice, Athens: Papazisis.
Lazos, Gr. (2001). Prostitution and Trafficking in Modern Greece, Athens: Kastaniotis
   (vol. 1, The Prostitute; vol. 2, The Client).
106     Grigoris Lazos

Mills, C. W. (1981). The Sociological Imagination, London: Oxford University Press
   1958/1979
Oakley, A. ‘Interviewing women: A contradiction in terms’, in Doing Feminist Research,
   H. Roberts (ed.), pp. 30-61
Richardson, L. (1994). ‘Postmodern Social Theory: Representational Practices’, Socio-
   logical Theory, 9, pp. 173-79.
Maganas, A. and Gr. Lazos (1999).. Social Values of Deviants and Non-Deviants, Athens,
   Panteion.
Matza, D. and Gr. Sykes (1961). ‘Juvenile Delinquency and Subterranean Values’,
   American Sociological Review, 26, pp. 712-19
Matza, D. (1964). Delinquency and Drift, New York: Wiley.
Miles, M. B. and A. M. Huberman (1984). Qualitative Data Analysis: A Sourcebook of
   New Methods, Beverly Hills: Sage.
Nisbet, R. A. (1969). Social Change and History. Aspects of the Western Theory of
   Development, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Olmann, B. (1993). Dialectical Investigations, New York: Routledge.
Park, R. E., E. W. Burgess and R. D. McKenzie (1967). The City, Chicago: University
   of Chicago Press.
Pepinsky, H. E. (1986). ‘The Sociology of Justice’, Annual Review of Sociology, 12,       .
   93-108.
Punch, M. (1986). The Politics and Ethics of Fieldwork, Beverly Hills: Sage.
Rasmussen, P. (1989). Massage Parlor Prostitution, New York: Irvington.
Sayer, A. (1984). Method in Social Science: A Realist Approach, London: Hutchinson
   University Library.
Sayer, A. (1997). ‘Essentialism, social constructionism and beyond’, Sociological Review,
   45, pp. 453-87.
Shea, G. P. and R. A. Guzzo (1987). ‘Groups as human resources’, in research in
   Personnel and Human Resources Management, K. M. Rowland and G. R. Ferris (eds.),
   Greenwich: JAI Press, pp. 323-56.
Taylor, I., P. Walton and J. Young (1973). The New Criminology. For a Social Theory
   of Deviance, New York: Harper.
Van Maanen, J. (1988). Tales of the Field: On writing Ethnography, Chicago: University
   of Chicago Press.
Vidich, A. J. and S. M. Lyman (1985). American Sociology: Wordly Rejections of Religion
   and their Directions, New Haven: Yale University Press.
Whyte, W. F. (1981). Street Corner Society: The social Structure on an Italian Slum,
   Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wise, S. (1987). ‘A framework for discussing ethical issues in feminist research: A review
   of the literature’, Studies in Sexual Politics, pp. 47-88.
10
The Long Road from Rhetoric
to Evidence on Trafficking in Human
Beings: About Research Efforts
to Prepare Proper EU Monitoring
on the Matter
Gert Vermeulen∗




Abstract:   The development of indicators on violence and related data collection
            regarding missing and sexually exploited children and trafficking in human
            beings is essential in preparing and supporting evidence-based policy making
            in the said areas. At present, however, there is no comprehensive matrix of
            relevant indicators, characteristics and variables, standardised for the entire
            EU, regarding the said phenomena.
                Various research efforts to prepare proper EU monitoring on the matter
            are described, leading up to a proposal for standardised EU templates and
            a blueprint for EU-wide collection of integrated statistical information and
            strategic analysis at both member state and EU (cross-country) level on the
            phenomena concerned.



1.   Introduction
Trafficking in human beings is a phenomenon that has become a serious
problem throughout the world, including in the European Union (EU).
Addressing the problem properly requires insight into the phenomenon.
Reliable information is needed about present developments, threats, recent
methods, modus operandi, number of persons involved, amount of money
involved, etc. In the absence of reliable data, often stereotypes are being
taken for truth and policies are being built on rhetoric and ideology rather

∗
  Professor of Criminal Law – Director IRCP (Institute for International Research on
Criminal Policy) (ircp.org), Ghent University.


                                                                                       107
108     Gert Vermeulen

than on evidence. There is a need for strategic and statistical information
on trafficking in human beings, both at Member State and EU level.
Additionally, the demand for information on the related criminal legis-
lation of the various Member States and its application is considerable.
   The lack of reliable data is very high on the national agendas of the
Member States as well as on the European/international agenda. An EU
experts group on trafficking in human beings1 was created of which the
main task was to draft a report which it has published in December
2004. The commission issued a communication on 18 October 2005 in
which it again emphasises the importance of relevant data at national and
international level.2
   At national level as well as at the international level, increasing
attention was given to trying to develop mechanisms that enable assessing
the true scope of trafficking in human beings. To a growing extent,
particular research attention has also been given to scientific data
collection on the phenomenon.
   The text below focuses on step-by-step research development in this
very context by the Institute for International Research on Criminal Policy
(IRCP) and some of its partners. Ultimately, the intention is to contribute
to evidence-based policy-making by paving the methodological way to the
establishment of an independent EU monitoring function for trafficking
in human beings and related phenomena such as sexual exploitation
(of children) and – to some extent – the phenomenon of missing minors.
   Research was mostly co-funded by the European Commission under
the STOP, Daphne, Hippocrates or Agis programmes and involved the
participation of national law enforcement and NGO experts, international
law enforcement actors (Europol, Eurojust, Interpol) and international
organisations (European Commission, Council of the European Union,
Council of Europe). Also national research on trafficking in human beings
has been conducted and related statistical analysis is pending.


1
  In 2003, the Commission adopted the Decision setting up a consultative group, to be
known as the Experts Group on Trafficking in Human Beings and appointed the 20
members of the Group as independent experts not representing the views of their govern-
ments or organisations. The Group’s terms of reference are as follows: the Commission
may consult the Group on any matter relating to trafficking in human beings. The Group
shall issue opinions or reports to the Commission at the latter’s request or on its own
initiative, taking into due consideration the recommendations set out in the Brussels Decla-
ration. In particular, a report of the Group based on the recommendations of the Brussels
Declaration should be submitted to assist the Commission with a view to launching further
concrete proposals at EU level.
2
  Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council.
Fighting trafficking in human beings-an integrated approach and proposals for an action
plan, COM(2005) 514 final, 18.10.
                            10. The Long Road from Rhetoric to Evidence   109

2.   Missing Minors, Minor Victims of Sexual Offences
     or Trafficking in Human Beings and Perpetrators
     of Such Offences
A first project in the domain concerned, conducted by IRCP in 1998, was
aimed at studying the opportunity and feasibility of systematic gathering
and administration of data concerning missing minors, minor victims
of sexual offences or trafficking in human beings and perpetrators of
such offences (1996/STOP/003, 1998). In a follow-up project, conducted
in 2001, IRCP tested the feasibility of further elaboration and interna-
tional implementation of the recommendations resulting from the afore-
mentioned project (2000/STOP/116, 2001).
   The 1998 project more specifically assessed whether it was possible
and desirable to have one or more international databases gathering as
much information as possible concerning the above-mentioned categories
of persons.
   In order to formulate an answer to these research questions, several
aspects were looked at. Starting from the idea that a maximum amount
of information has to be gathered on the said phenomena, the researchers
investigated what could possibly be achieved legally and what were the
legal conditions and requirements for setting up the envisaged databases.
Taking in to account the existing possibilities of international databases
and considering the need for data in practice, the opportunity was also
evaluated.
   The study consisted of three parts: a legal part, a functional part and a
technical part. The legal part of the research assesses what legal require-
ments have to be taken into consideration when systematically gathering
and managing of information. The functional part of the study investi-
gated the needs for data to be used by the actors responsible for the fight
against trafficking in human beings and sexual exploitation of children
and the compatibility of those needs with the initiatives of other interna-
tional organs.
   This project identified a great need for information on the legal
definitions of the other Member States concerning the afore-mentioned
phenomena. Furthermore, a need for reliable and comparable statis-
tical information was recognised. To this end, it was recommended to
establish a European monitoring centre for sexual exploitation of and
trade in children from which statistical information at the international
level would be centralised. The national statistics and strategic data can
be analysed and compared there in order to provide a European Picture of
the problems. This can, in turn, form the basis for elaborating European
prevention strategies (De Ruyver et al., 2000).
110    Gert Vermeulen

   The goal of the 2001 study was to further prepare the practical setting
up of several international databases with immediate relevance to the
police and the judicial authorities, prosecuting or investigating magistrates
and judges, both in the Member States and candidate countries. During
this project, it was shown that the collection of reliable statistics, strategic
data and legal information on trafficking in human beings should be
entrusted to an EU monitoring centre.
   A first step towards the establishment of an EU monitoring centre
would be the full application and the extension of the mandate of National
Rapporteurs on trafficking in women, in order to create a European
network on information exchange on trafficking in human beings. This
network would gather comprehensive information at national level and
promote the exchange of information within this field among the Member
States on a regular basis. Once the monitoring centre is established, this
network of rapporteurs will have to give it itsfull support.
   Secondly, it was recommended to establish a genuine EU monitoring
centre responsible for the collection of reliable statistics and strategic
data in the field of trafficking in human beings. This international body
was also to be given the task of creating an international database acces-
sible via a website containing relevant pieces of legislation on trafficking
in human beings from the Member States. This information was to be
extended with information on the possibilities of extra-territorial prose-
cution. According to the findings, the international monitoring centre
was to be responsible for the centralisation of statistical information on
an EU level. The gathered national statistics and strategic information
should be analysed and compared in order to provide a European picture
of the phenomenon of trafficking in human beings. This could, in turn,
form the basis for the elaboration of European prevention strategies. This
centre was also to provide extensive legal information. It was furthermore
recommended that the proposed monitoring centre would cooperate with
the various international organisations working in the field of trafficking
in human beings as much as possible, in order to avoid a replication of
efforts in the collection of specific information. These external partner-
ships could fall into three main categories: international organisations,
EU institutions and non-EU countries.
   At national level, it was recommended to create national focal points
in order to gather all relevant information from both governmental
and private organisations. These national efforts should take place in a
uniform manner within all the Member States. The national focal points
should be responsible for gaining a full picture of trafficking in human
beings at the regional level. Statistical data available to police services,
justice departments and private organisations should first be gathered at
                                10. The Long Road from Rhetoric to Evidence         111

national level before they can be centralised at the international level.
The national focal points should also be responsible for the registration of
information in a uniform manner in the different Member States in order
to make the data comparable, as countries do not utilise standardised
systems for reporting and recording figures on the phenomenon, if indeed
they do so at all. Finally, the focal points should be responsible for the
quality of the centralised data. They can function as a filter between the
national or regional level and the international level represented by the
monitoring centre.
   Attention should also be given to the access to this statistical and
legal information within the framework of this monitoring centre. This
must under no circumstances be limited, since statistical data, analysis
figures and legal information are important to both governmental and
private organisations and scientific institutions. The availability of this
information for such organisations could facilitate scientific research and
public awareness with a view to adapting successful countermeasures and
comprehensive policies in the long term (Vermeulen et al., 2001).


3.    Victims of Trafficking in Human Beings in 3 EU
      Member States: Belgium, Italy and the Netherlands
The project (JAI/2001/HIP/015, 2001-2002) consisted of research in
three EU Member States (Belgium, Italy and the Netherlands) that had
implemented witness protection programs providing residence permits,
along with special assistance programs for victims of trafficking, long
before Council Directive 2001/81/EC of 29 April 2004.3 The aim of the
project consisted in identifying the practices and mechanisms of trans-
national crime related to trafficking, contributing towards a recommenda-
tions policy and defining durable solutions for preventing and combating
trafficking in human beings.
   Research was primarily based on a case file analysis of 481 victims, in
the framework of witness cooperation programs and investigative proce-
dures, in order to identify organised crime groups and to prosecute the
traffickers. Special attention was paid to victims of smuggling in human
beings as under the Belgium legislative framework.


3
  Council Directive 2004/81/EC of 29 April 2004 on the residence permit issued to third-
country nationals who are victims of trafficking in human beings or who have been the
subject of an action to facilitate illegal immigration, who cooperate with the competent
authorities, OJ 6/8/2004, L 261, 19.
112     Gert Vermeulen

   The report offers statistical analysis of the data found in the case files
of the victims and also provides relevant information on travel routes, as
well as profiles of victims, traffickers and the so-called passeurs.
   In relation to Belgium, the study covered the whole country through
data from the three official victim reception/assistance centres recognised
by the federal Government. In order to be able to analyse the policy
concerning the fight against trafficking in human beings in an effective
way, the Human Trafficking Unit of the Centre for Equal Opportunities
and Combating Racism and the three assistance centres have set up a
central victim database, which is governed by the Centre and is at the
disposal of the three centres. The Centre for Equal Opportunities and
Combating Racism has been given the task, since 1995, to stimulate
and coordinate efforts to fight the trade in human beings and to followi
through the government’s policy in this area. Every year, the Centre draws
up an independent, public evaluation report about the developments and
results in the fight against international trade in human beings. These
critical reports provide a significant stimulus and support for the actors
in this field. The Centre, which governs the central victim database and
thus receives data form the victim assistance centres and hasto report on
the situation of trafficking in human beings in Belgium, can actually be
seen as a national rapporteur avant-la-lettre.


4.    “Childoscope” Projects
On 27 September 2001, the Council of the European Union adopted
a Resolution under the Belgian presidency on the contribution of civil
society in finding missing and sexually exploited children4 . In doing so,
the JHA Council expressed its belief in enhanced cooperation between
civil society organisations and law enforcement services in preventing
and combating these phenomena. The Council Resolution called on the
European Commission to have a study drawn up on (1) the extent of the
phenomena of missing and sexually exploited minors in the EU Member
States, (2) the existence, role and structure of civil society organisations
in the Member States, along with their arrangements for involvement and
cooperation with the competent authorities and (3) legal issues arising
from the involvement and cooperation of such organisations with the
competent law enforcement services, in particular issues of authorities


4
  Resolution on the contribution of civil society in finding missing and sexually exploited
children, OJ C 283, 09/10/2001 P. 0001-0002.
                            10. The Long Road from Rhetoric to Evidence   113

sending confidential information to NGO’s, impact of NGO involvement
on criminal procedure and data protection rules.
   These three objectives are embedded in three different studies. IRCP
and the Department for Research and Prevention of the European Centre
for Missing and Sexually Exploited Children (Child Focus) joined forces
to accomplish this study through a combined STOP/Daphne project,
co-financed by the European Commission (2002/STOP/108, 2002-2003:
Follow-up of the Council resolution of 21 September 2001 on the
contribution of Civil Society in Finding missing and Sexually exploited
children).
   The first part of the study comprises of country reports of the then
15 Member States. Each country report provides essential definitional
information regarding the various forms of sexual exploitation of children
and types of missing children, outlines the way data collection on sexually
exploited and missing children by various governmental (police, judicial,
other) and non-governmental actors is organised and delivers available
data on the phenomena concerned. A final, comparative report bridges the
country report information into a first Union-wide epidemiological state
of the art, thus showing that current data collection is organised in a very
chaotic and poor fashion. At the same time, the report identifies the main
weaknesses and shortcomings of applied data collection methods. It also
offers a set of recommendations for both Member State and EU action in
striving for improved and integrated ways of collecting, administering and
centralising reliable, comparable and comprehensive data on the various
cases of missing and sexually exploited children.
   As a result of the enlargement of the EU, the research was extended
to the 10 new Member States in a follow-up study (JAI/2004/AGIS/008,
2004-2005: Study on the actual extent of the phenomenon of missing and
sexually exploited children in the 10 new Member States). The newly
gathered information from the country reports on the ten new Member
States, regarding the situation of definitions and data collection on missing
and sexually exploited children, was combined with previously gathered
information so as to provide an analytical picture for the enlarged EU of
25 Member States.
   The objective of both “Childoscope” studies was to draw up an
epidemiological state of the art of the situation in the enlarged EU. This
‘status questionis’ contains all national available figures on missing and
sexually exploited children and gives an extensive view on how data
collection is organised in the 25 Member States. By studying the way
data collection on missing and sexually exploited children is currently
being organised and pointing out the shortcomings and weaknesses of
the applied working methods, recommendations were made to Member
114    Gert Vermeulen

States to improve the organisation of the data gathering. All available
figures at Member State level on missing and sexually exploited children
were gathered.
   The ultimate – mid or long-term – purpose of the studies was to prepare
the way for an EU monitoring centre on missing and sexually exploited
children which would ensure the centralisation and administration of
fundamental, reliable and comprehensive data on all aspects of missing
and sexually exploited children in the long term.
   In order to facilitate the comparison of the quantitative data contained
in the national reports of the 25 Member States, it was decided to
formulate uniform research definitions of sexual exploitation and missing
children, largely based on definitions agreed to in, inter alia, the EU
Framework Decisions on trafficking in human beings (July 2002) and
Sexual exploitation of children and child pornography (December 2003).
On the occasion of the first international meeting, held in Brussels on
February 7 and 8, 2003 these definitions were discussed and agreed
upon with the academic experts, the representatives of non-governmental
organisations and the law enforcement experts of the 15 Member States
who were involved in the first project. At the very start of the follow-up
project, experts from the 10 new Member States endorsed them, thus
introducing standardised research definitions for the EU of 25 for the
first time. National definitions in the national reports, originating from
criminal law, governmental organisations and non-governmental organ-
isations, were systematically compared with the agreed research defini-
tions in analysing data collection and presenting findings.
   Below, the afore-mentioned subjects are further elaborated.


a. Uniform Research/Data Collection Definitions
According to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, of 20
November 1989, and the Optional Protocol to the CRC on the sale of
children, child prostitution and child pornography of 25 May 2000, a
child is a person below 18 years of age.
  An inventory was made of the age of sexual consent in the different
Member States. There is no consensus in the European Member States as
regards the age of sexual consent. The lowest age is at 13 (Spain) and the
highest is at 18 (Malta).

i. Sexually exploited children
Sexual exploitation is a generic concept and is separate from trafficking in
human beings. The definitions concerning sexual exploitation of children
                                10. The Long Road from Rhetoric to Evidence        115

are based on the Council Framework Decision on combating the sexual
exploitation of children and child pornography, of 29 July 20035 .
   Several subcategories exist in relation to the sexual exploitation of
children:

Sexual assault
Sexual assault can be defined as engaging in sexual activities with a child
under the age of sexual consent or engaging in sexual activities with a
child above the age of sexual consent where use is made of coercion,
force or threats, money or other forms of remuneration or consideration is
given as payment in exchange for the child engaging in sexual activities
or abuse is made of a recognised position of trust, authority or influence
over the child, irrespective of whether it is within a family context or not.

Child prostitution
Exploitation in child prostitution can be described as coercing or
recruiting a child into prostitution, profiting from or otherwise exploiting
a child for such purposes.

Child pornography
The production, distribution, dissemination, transmission, supplying,
making available, acquisition and possession of child pornography,
meaning pornographic material that visually depicts or represents:

– a real child involved or engaged in sexually explicit conduct, including
  lascivious exhibition of the genitals or the pubic area of a child;
– or a real person appearing to be a child involved or engaged in the
  afore-mentioned conduct;
– or realistic images of a non-existent child involved or engaged in the
  afore-mentioned conduct;

and taking into consideration that the following conduct may be excluded:
child pornography where a real person appearing to be a child was in
fact 18 years of age or older at the time of depiction; child pornography
where, in the case of production and possession, images of children
having reached the age of sexual consent are produced and possessed
with their consent and solely for their own private use. Even where the
existence of consent has been established, it shall not be considered valid,

5
  Council Framework Decision on combating the sexual exploitation of children and child
pornography of 29 July 2003 (10748/03).
116    Gert Vermeulen

if for example superior age, maturity, position, status, experience or the
victim’s dependency on the perpetrator has been abused in achieving
the consent; child pornography consisting of realistic images of a non
existing child where it is established that the pornographic material is
produced and possessed by the producer solely for his or her private use,
as far as no pornographic material involving a child or a real person
appearing to be a child has been used for the purpose of its production,
and provided that the act involves no risk for the dissemination of the
material.

Sex tourism
Exploitation in the context of sex tourism can be defined as either:

– engaging in sexual activities with a child under the age of sexual
  consent in another country than the country of origin of the perpetrator
  (this means that sex tourism involves the same conduct as sexual
  assault, only the perpetrator commits the offence in another country
  than his/her own);
– engaging in sexual activities with a child above the age of sexual
  consent in another country than the country of origin of the perpetrator
  where: use is made of coercion, force or threats, money or other forms
  of remuneration or consideration is given as payment in exchange for
  the child engaging in sexual activities or abuse is made of a recognised
  position of trust, authority or influence over the child.

In different countries, exploitation in the context of sex tourism is not
a separate offence. In that case and taking into consideration that the
definition of sex tourism is not that different from the one of sexual
assault, it is a matter of extraterritorial competence when it concerns a
national committing the offence abroad. Furthermore, in case it concerns
a foreign perpetrator committing the offence in the country, the question
of universal jurisdiction should be asked.

Trafficking in children for the purpose of sexual exploitation
The definition of trafficking in children for the purpose of sexual
exploitation is based on the Council Framework Decision on combating
trafficking in human beings of 19 July 20026 : the recruitment, trans-
portation, transfer, harbouring, subsequent reception of a child (either


6
  Council Framework Decision 2002/629/JHA on combating trafficking in human beings
of 19 July 2002
                            10. The Long Road from Rhetoric to Evidence   117

abandoned or not), including exchange or transfer of control over that
child for the purpose of exploitation of the prostitution of others or other
forms of sexual exploitation, including in pornography.


ii. Missing children
The definitions of different types of missing children have mainly been
based upon the definitions used by various organisations active in the
field of missing children:

Runaway (national/international)
This category concerns all minors who voluntarily run away from home
or from the institution where he/she has been placed.

Abduction by a third person (national/international)
This category covers all abductions of minors by anyone other than the
parents or the persons with parental authority.

Parental abduction (national/international)
As parental abduction is regarded the fact of a child being taken away
to or kept in a country other than that of its normal residence by one or
more of its parents or persons having parental authority against another
parent’s will or against the will of the person with parental authority.

Lost, injured or otherwise missing
Listed here are disappearances, for no apparent reason, of minors who
have got lost (e.g. little children at the seaside in summer) or hurt
themselves and cannot be found immediately (e.g. accidents during sport
activities, at youth camps, etc.).

Missing unaccompanied migrant children
The following definition is based upon the United Nations, General
Assembly, Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons
and humanitarian questions, A/56/333. This category covers the missing
migrant children, nationals of a country with which there is no free
movement of persons, under the age of 18 who have been separated from
both parents and are not being cared for by an adult, who by law is
responsible for doing so.
118    Gert Vermeulen

b. National Organisation of Data Collection
The national organisation of data collection was studied in the 25 Member
States. Insight was provided on several components of the data collection.
Firstly, a view of the registration system for the different levels collecting
data was obtained. Data can be gathered at the level of the police, prose-
cution, judicial investigation, court, or can be obtained through field-
workers, other NGO’s, GO’s, surveys … Furthermore, information about
the counting units, whether the data was centralised or decentralised
and whether there was a system of sharing or exchanging information
was investigated. Various other aspects were analysed: since when data
is collected and for what period of time, whether data collection was
electronic or not, whether the data gathered concerned anonymous, deper-
sonalised or personal data and whether there was a direct availability of
data or not. In terms of victims and offenders, the kind of information
gathered in the different countries was investigated. This may range
from age group, gender, convicted or suspect person to the relationship
with the victim or offender. The kind of information was gathered with
regard to cases was also assessed, e.g. whether a case is pending or
settled. Furthermore, an answer was sought to the question about how to
avoid double counting. Finally, insight was given in the differences in
data collection and between all different forms of missing and sexually
exploited children.
    In order to be able to correctly interpret the data provided in the national
reports, it was essential to obtain some insight in respect of three issues
regarding the criminal justice system applicable in the countries. With
regard to the system of prosecution, one needs to know whether a country
applies the “principle of legality” or “the principle of discretionary powers
(opportunity)”. Furthermore, it is necessary to know whether the prose-
cution of offences related to sexual exploitation of children and missing
children is only possible where there is a complaint (private crime). Finally,
it is important to know if a para-judicial settlement of a case is possible.
    One of the main conclusions of this part of the research is that current
data collection on sexually exploited and missing minors is generally
poor and chaotic. Statistics regarding sexual exploitation of children and
missing children are generally unavailable on different levels, especially
when it comes to survey information. The main data collectors are law
enforcement agencies. There is little or no sound information available
from non-governmental organisations or governmental organisations. The
data gathering is seldom organised on a centralised level and double
counting cannot be prevented. Computerisation of data is mainly limited
to the law enforcement sector. Furthermore, the units of counting (victims,
cases …) differ significantly and direct availability of information remains
a true problem.
                            10. The Long Road from Rhetoric to Evidence   119

5.   International Trafficking in Human Beings
     for the Purpose of Sexual Exploitation in the EU
     Member States
IRCP acted as the Belgian expert in this research project, which itself
was coordinated by Transcrime (Mon-EU-Traf II, 2004-2005). The aim
of the project was, among other things, to provide insight into the data
collection systems on trafficking in human beings for the purposes of
sexual exploitation in the 15 initial EU Member States.
   A uniform research definition of trafficking in human beings was
used. It was based on the Council Framework Decision on combating
trafficking in human beings of 19 July 2002 and the UN Protocol of 2000
to prevent, suppress and punish trafficking in persons, especially women
and children, supplementing the United Nations convention against trans-
national organised crime. As a result, trafficking in persons was agreed to
mean the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or subsequent
reception of a person by means of coercion, of force or threat, including
abduction, of deceit or fraud or of the abuse of authority or of a position
of vulnerability which is such that the person has no real and acceptable
alternative but to submit to the abuse involved or of payments or benefits
given or received to achieve the consent of a person having control
over another person, for the purposes of exploitation. Exploitation shall
include the exploitation of that person’s labour or services including at
least forced or compulsory labour or services, slavery or practices similar
to slavery or servitude, or the exploitation of the prostitution of others or
other forms of sexual exploitation, including pornography, or the removal
of organs.
   A number of best practices were recommended and estimates were
made of the scale of trafficking and the monetary turnover of traffickers
from data collected by means of the spreadsheets used in the research.


6.   National Research on Trafficking in Human Beings
     and Related Data Collection
In June 2006 – in parallel actually with the SIAMSECT project which
is mentioned below – the first-ever full-scale statistical analysis of the
Belgian national victim database at the Centre for Equal Opportunities
and Combating Racism was initiated. The victim database at the Centre
for Equal Opportunities and Combating Racism enables the centre to be
the first of the involved partners to have very detailed, standardised and
centrally gathered information on files of registered victims of human
smuggling or trafficking at its disposal. Moreover, at present, no other
120    Gert Vermeulen

EU Member State has such a central database with nation-wide data on
all official victims of trafficking in human beings at its disposal. The
structure of the database could probably also prove to be an adequate
starting point for the development of an integrated and standardised data
collection plan on human smuggling and trafficking for the benefit of
the Centre for Information and Analysis on trafficking in human beings
and Smuggling in Persons (IAMM). IAMM was assigned , by the Royal
Decree of 16 May 2004, the task of gathering, centralising, managing,
exchanging and analysing depersonalised data in the fight against human
smuggling and trafficking. However, the processing of the anonymous
information, gathered from the different partners, into reliable integrated
strategic analyses by the strategic analysts of the IAMM can be possible
only if one starts from an integrated and standardised data collection plan.
   It seems that another, similar research project will be conducted at
the initiative of the unit dealing with trafficking in human beings of the
federal police, with the aim of developing a methodology for monitoring
the phenomenon.
   Ideally, both projects will (eventually) culminate in a model for
integrated, depersonalised, strategic, law enforcement, victim-related data
analysis at the level of the newly established Centre for Information and
Analysis on trafficking in human beings and Smuggling of persons. In
this capacity, the IAMM would be the prime model for a future EU
monitoring centre for the phenomenon.


7.    Missing and Sexually Exploited Children
      and Trafficking in Human Beings
In 2005-2006, IRCP and Transcrime as a research partner have been
jointly conducting a project, co-financed by the European Commission
under the Daphne Programme, which they named ‘SIAMSECT’ (Statis-
tical Information and Analysis on Missing and Sexually Exploited
Children and Trafficking in human beings). The results will be available
in the autumn of 2006.
   The starting point for the project is the previous research experience
of IRCP collected through the two epidemiological studies on missing
and sexually exploited minors in the 25 Member States (Childoscope).
Furthermore, the insights obtained by the Mon-EU-Traf I and II projects
conducted by Transcrime in the then 15 Member State also form a basis
for the study, as well as the case study on victims in Belgium.
   Aim of the project is to develop an EU template and EU collection
plan allowing for standardised and integrated statistical information and
                            10. The Long Road from Rhetoric to Evidence   121

strategic analysis at both Member State and cross-EU (cross-country)
level which is indispensable for the future work of national data collection
(focal points) and (an) EU monitoring (centre) on the subject.
   From a methodological viewpoint, the elaboration of such an EU
template and collection plan is indispensable for centralised, coherent,
scientifically reliable and comparable data mapping in national data
collection focal points at member state level as well as for genuine EU
strategic monitoring of the phenomena concerned (involving also EU-
related data retrieved from the main international organisations or official
bodies and international NGO’s active in the areas concerned) and subse-
quent evidence-based policy making on missing and sexually exploited
children and trafficking in human beings at both member state and EU
level.
   The SIAMSECT project best qualifies as a preliminary method-
ological study required for an EU monitoring function on the phenomena
concerned, irrespective of the question which organisation/international
body should be entrusted with this monitoring task – the latter decision
being a mere political (and difficult) one.
   In the meantime, the Commission issued a Communication on
18 October 2005 in which it states that the future European Union
Agency for fundamental rights (the present European Monitoring Centre
on Racism and Xenophobia) should – in line with its mandate and in
close cooperation with the future European Migration Network (EMN) as
well as with the Experts Group on Trafficking in human Beings- collect
and analyse data on human trafficking.


a. Template
At present, there is no comprehensive matrix of relevant indicators,
characteristics and variables, standardised for the entire EU, regarding the
said phenomena. The aim is to develop a template of indicators that can
be used by the Member States and the international organisations in order
to obtain a comprehensive and comparable view of the phenomenon of
trafficking in human beings and the phenomena of missing and sexually
exploited children.
   This EU template will make it possible tostreamline and structure
related data collection from both official authorities and civil society
organisations at Member State level in so-called national focal points.
   At an EU level, this template is necessary in order to allow reliable
cross-Member State data collection and statistical strategic comparison
and analysis by an EU monitoring function/centre. This will enable the
bridging of information relevant for the EU context that may be retrieved
122    Gert Vermeulen

from various international organisations or official bodies and from inter-
national NGO’s dealing with the said phenomena into overall integrated
EU statistics on missing and sexually exploited children and trafficking
in human beings, avoiding overlap or double counting with data retrieved
from the individual Member States.
   The matrix will reflect the smallest categorisation unit used at Member
State level or foreseen in international definitions for the above-mentioned
phenomena. This exercise requires a systematic breakdown or decon-
struction of the available or collected data and the criminal definitions
of the said phenomena according to a multitude of possible relevant
indicators, characteristics and variables that might have to be re-clustered
afterwards for reporting purposes.
   The indicators, variables and characteristics will relate to several topics.
   First, the constituent elements of the various (sub)offences or types of
disappearances concerned are an important source to retrieve indicators.
Furthermore, the indicators will relate to the types and character of the
violence, pressure, coercion or exploitation. Indicators of this category
involve: sexual intercourse, sexual aggression, via internet, administration
of medication, locking victims up etc. A third set of indicators concerns
the one referring to characteristics of the victim. For the phenomena of
missing and sexually exploited children, it is interesting to know about
the social anamnesis of the victim, the administrative status, assistance
and reception conditions, witness protection, degree of (re)integration
following victim support,… Also, indicators will relate to the person of
the suspect or perpetrator: social anamnesis, first or re-offenders, physical
or legal personality etc. Other indicators will relate to the travel routes
and means of transport, the recruitment process and the place and sector
of exploitation. A last category of indicators will concern the role or
profession of the victim or perpetrator and, more specifically, whether
they were recruiter, passeur, bartender, driver, dancer, animation girl,
waiter/waitress, dj, owner etc.


b. Collection Plan
Besides the template, the research also aims at developing a data
collection plan for the afore-mentioned information. This data collection
plan will allow the streamlining and structuring of information at Member
State level that can be collected from official authorities (police data,
prosecution data, conviction data, detention data, parole and mediation,
criminal records data, parental abduction,…) and civil society organisa-
tions (NGO’s, helping professions, offender treatment centres, victims
reception/assistance centres, hotlines, family mediation,…).
                                 10. The Long Road from Rhetoric to Evidence         123

   At EU level, the data collection plan will indicate how and to what
extent information may be retrieved from various international organisa-
tions without overlapping with Member State data. The various interna-
tional organisations are: Europol, Eurojust, EU experts group on THB,
OSCE (special representative), UN (Global Programme against THB),
ILO (Forced labour special Action Programme). In addition to them,
there are various international NGO’s dealing with the said phenomena
who also can provide data.

c. Project Methodology
The methodology used in this research project involves a desk research
of relevant literature and legislation. This also includes the valorisation
of the results of previous research.
   A next step concerned feedback on the draft EU template and collection
plan from national experts in the 25 Member States.
   Furthermore, working visits were conducted to the afore-mentioned
international organisations dealing with the phenomena concerned. Their
methodology for gathering data and the indicators they use can be of
great importance to the research. Working visits were also conducted
to the two existing EU monitoring centres, EMCDDA (drugs and drug
addiction, Lisbon) and EUMC (racism and xenophobia, Vienna).
   Finally, an international steering group was established. The latter
functioned as an external evaluation body for the project. Representatives
of the various organisations collecting data or organisations having some
expertise in the areas of missing and sexually exploited children and
trafficking in human beings met twice during the lifetime of the project
to discuss the progress made and to share ideas about the template and
data collection plan.

References
Vermeulen, G. (2005). Missing and sexually exploited children in the new member states
  and the enlarged EU. Epidemiological data, Antwerp/Apeldoorn: Maklu.
Vermeulen, G. and De Pauw, H. (2004). Missing and sexually exploited children in the
  EU. Epidemiological data, Antwerp/Apeldoorn: Maklu.
Vandekerckhove, W., Pari, Z., Moens, B., Orfano, I., Hopkins, R., Nijboer, J., Vermeulen,
  G. and Bontinck, W. (2003). Research based on case studies of victims of trafficking
  in human beings in 3 EU Member States, i.e. Belgium, Italy and the Netherlands,
  Payoke - On the Road - De Rode Draad.
Vermeulen, G., Dhont, F. and Dormaels A. (2001). European data collection on Sexual
  Offences against Minors. Antwerp/Apeldoorn: Maklu.
De Ruyver, B., Zanders, P., Vermeulen, G. and Derre, G. (2000). Vermiste en seksueel
  uitgebuite minderjarigen. Antwerp/Apeldoorn: Maklu.
11
Conclusions
Ernesto U. Savona and Sonia Stefanizzi




Each of the contributions to this volume has touched upon different angles
of the topic, with different ideas and proposals on how to improve the
knowledge of the phenomenon of trafficking in human beings and its
measuring.
   Trafficking in human beings as a crime has now entered the texts of
many national legislations as a consequence of international agreements
and conventions. The long way to the harmonisation of definitions has
started, even if not concluded. There remains the enormous difficulty of
implementing it under very different conditions. If trafficking in human
beings is a rewarding business for organised crime groups, it is also
the vehicle for many desperate people to leave low social and economic
conditions for something they believe to be better. This means that the
implementation of these laws needs to take into account the pushing
factors that create opportunities for this crime. It is possible that this
crime may be considered a crime against the humanity in the future, but
this will not solve the problem. The real issue today is to understand the
phenomenon in order to find appropriate remedies. This is the rationale
of its measurement.
   The dynamic of this crime is almost clear. It is a typical criminal
intermediation, that helps to meet two illegal demands: the growing
demand for illegal migration coming from the less advantaged regions and
countries of the world and the growing demand for prostitutes, manual
workers, etc. in those countries where there are no national supplies and/or
economical prices. The resulting underworld with its subsequent violence
stems from these two demands and from the difficulty to regulate them. In
other words, human smuggling and its violent appendix of the trafficking
in human beings, rather than the result of perverse criminal minds, is the
result of opportunities provided to criminals by the difficulty/incapacity
to regulate the flow of migration from poor to rich countries.

                                                                        125
126    Ernesto U. Savona and Sonia Stefanizzi

   Being aware of that means going over the criminalisation of the
phenomenon, that salves the conscience of the international community,
in order to intervene in those parts of the system that are vulnerable
to criminal exploitation. Intercepting vessels carrying illegal migrants
and arresting traffickers is like trying to empty the sea of problems
connected with illegal migration with a glass. An effective strategy should
be oriented toward the simultaneous actions of acting upon the problems
and reducing opportunities for criminals. In order to do that, apart from
the present policies of assisting deprived countries and agreeing with
countries of origin, a strong effort should be made by countries that
want to reduce this phenomenon by working at the national level to
reduce the benefits deriving from the use of trafficked people. This means
developing strict forms of control for those who, in different ways, take
advantage of trafficked people (clients and retailers who “use” prostitutes,
entrepreneurs who recruit irregular workers, etc). To regulate “the other
side” is fine, but it would probably be more effective is to regulate “our
side”, something that in the present debate on the phenomenon has not
been adequately considered.
   This perspective requests a knowledge-based attitude, a specific under-
standing of the trafficking in human beings phenomenon. As a form of
situational approach, it requests the accurate scanning and analysis of the
problems. In this respect, the aggregate dimension of how many people
are trafficked and what are the indicators of trafficking are not signif-
icant. More important is to understand and measure “for which purposes”
(prostitution, drugs, work), i.e. in which specific market trafficked people
are exploited. The production of reliable estimates will allow to assess
the dimension of the national demands and related opportunities and will
also allow to design more focused and effective interventions. This means
the implementation of policies oriented in detecting and deterring illegal
demands for prostitution, drugs, work, bringing, when possible, some of
these black markets to a legal dimension. In this regard, the current debate
on the causal relation between different policies on prostitution and the
extent of the market of trafficked prostitution is particularly valuable.
The question is: how to implement national policies on prostitution able
to reduce the illegal market of sex?
   In order to do that we need a comprehensive view of the problem,
which should not only be limited to trafficking in women and children for
sexual exploitation. In addition, we need better instruments to measure
each segment of the markets in which criminal exploitation takes place.
We need also to take into account not only the international dimension
but also the national one, when trafficking occurs within a single country.
   What are the possible steps of this perspective?
                                                      11. Conclusions   127

   Firstly, to understand the specific problems and its dynamics. Not all
forms of exploitation are the same. For instance, the market of prosti-
tution is different from the labour market and so are the mechanisms of
exploitation.
   Secondly, to assess demand and supply in the different markets (prosti-
tution, labour, etc.), by separating the legal from the illegal ones.
   Thirdly, to develop “criminal disincentives”, such as specific criminal
sanctions.
   Fourthly, to develop, when possible, “regulatory disincentives” for
those who exploit illegal workers (in the labour market).
   Fifthly, to develop mechanisms able to create a conflict of interest
between trafficked victims and exploiters that would facilitate the
emersion of the phenomenon and its displacement to the legal dimension.
   Many of these steps are already stated in several legislations, but they
are not strongly implemented. Starting to control “our side” will help
“the other side” take proper action to reduce problems connected with
trafficking in human beings and their consequences.
